

COURSE BOOK - III
Dr. T. S. N. Sastry
His Excellency Shri. K. Sankaranarayanan
Dr. W. N. Gade
Professor and 
Coordinator, HRE Programme
Department of Law
University of Pune
Hon'ble Governor of Maharashtra
Vice Chancellor
University of Pune
Foreword
Introduction
UNIVERSITY OF PUNE
HUMAN RIGHTS AND DUTIES IN INDIA : 
LAW, POLICY, SOCIETY AND
ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM
HUMAN RIGHTS AND DUTIES IN INDIA : 
LAW, POLICY, SOCIETY AND
ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM

Published by :
University of Pune.
Ganeshkhind Pune - 411 007.
Published by :
Ganeshkhind Pune - 411 007.
First Edition Feb. 2014
No part of this book or the slides shall be reproduced in any manner without the 
prior permission of the University of Pune.
University of Pune Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third-party internet website referred to in this publication and 
does not guarantee that any content on such websites is or will remain, accurate or 
appropriate.
Registrar,
University of Pune Press
© University of Pune
Feb 2014
P.U.P.—300- 1-2014 (549)[5]

FOREWORD
FOREWORD...
K.Sankaranarayanan
GOVERNOR OF MAHARASHTRA
RAJ BHAVAN
MUMBAI 400035
Tel : 022-2363 2660
Fax : 022-2368 0505
The present phase of globalisation and revolution in science and technology brought 
in the humanity together. However, economic, social, political and cultural differences are 
seen as a constant threat for governance and for the promotion of life and liberty of 
individuals to stand on an equal footing, and still a distant dream. In order to reaffirm the 
values of humanity to guarantee the concept of equality, life and liberty, the alternative lies in 
the practice and propagation of human rights. In the contemporary era, human rights from 
their western enlightenment thinking became not only the responsibility of state for its action, 
but also against the intrusion of multi-faceted aspects of social system. 
In the promotion of duty-based value system, human rights in their long saga, 
transcended from transnational frontiers to national legal structures in the modern context. In 
the absence of legal and institutional mechanism, infringement of individual liberties may not 
fortify the real perception of equality before law. Apart from the guaranteed institutional 
mechanism, civil society participation through advocacy groups brings in a cautious 
approach in the policy making tenets of the state and in the dealings between individuals. The 
present book 'Human Rights and Duties in India: Law, Policy, Society and Enforcement 
Mechanism' being the last one of the three volume series of the Human Right Education 
Programme of the University of Pune, succinctly introduces human rights in the Indian 
context with legal guarantees, enforcement mechanism and the role of advocacy groups. The 
comparative perspective of fundamental freedoms with that of human rights provisions in 
international instruments for an easy and compatible understanding of their relationship is 
highly commendable. I take this opportunity to congratulate Dr. W.N. Gade, Vice-Chancellor 
and various bodies of the University of Pune for the keen interest evinced in continuation of 
the programme launched in 2011 in developing a value-based student sorority.
I appreciate the efforts of Dr. T.S.N. Sastry, Coordinator of the Human Rights 
Education Programme, Professor and Former Head of the Department of Law for his 
sustained efforts in the augmentation of the ideals of the University in the propagation of 
human rights. I congratulate him for presenting entire human rights perspective with a lucid 
and simple outlook in a three book series.
I wish the programme a grand success. And I also appreciate the lead taken by the 
University of Pune, first in the country to propagate the International and National legal 
tenets of human rights as the fifth estate of the state to make proud of the State of Maharashtra 
in the annals of human rights education in the country.   
K. Sankaranarayanan 
Governor of Maharashtra

INTRODUCTION
This book on 'Human Rights and Duties in India: Law, 
Policy, Society and Enforcement Mechanism' is the final one in 
the series of Human Rights Education. International Law of 
human rights primarily imposes obligations upon nation-
states to implement the standards of it to alleviate the intensity of 
conflicts and to establish peace and security. These objectives of 
international law and as well that of human rights could be achieved only through the 
dissemination and promotion in national sphere by States. To fulfill the mandate 
without restoring to theoretical perplexities, nation-states around the world 
incorporated the tenets of international law of human rights to implement the mandate 
through their respective constitutional and legal texts for absorption and promotion.    
The framers of constitution under the leadership of Bharat Ratna Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar designed the legal tenets of human rights philosophy with a blend of 
international and indigenous philosophical reflections of India, based on Justice, 
Liberty and Equality to establish a duty bound fraternity to realise their rights as 
guaranteed by law. This fine blend of philosophical mixture of eastern and western 
ideological tenets through fundamental rights, directive principles of state policy have 
been further expanded by the judiciary through the legal acumen to assist the populace 
of the polity to realise their dreams of cherished values of equality, freedom, life and 
liberty. However, economic, socio, political, cultural imbalances that prevail in the 
country for long upset the applecart to bloom the rights of people, the way in which 
they are advocated to take pleasure in their enjoyment.
In order to restore the original legal position and to extend a helping hand to the 
needy, a number of welfare measures are advocated by the state on a continuous basis. 
Further, to achieve the objectives apart from the state, advocacy groups, people of all 
sections need to take active part for the further promotion of Human Rights to wipe out 
tears from every eye. With this inspiration, this book discusses subtly human rights in 
the Indian Context with a remedial mechanism to address the problems.  
In this regard, I thank His Excellency, The Chancellor and Hon'ble Governor of 
Maharashtra, Shri. K. Sankaranarayanan for his vision and support in the promotion of 
Human Rights Education by the University of Pune. I am also thankful to the 
INTRODUCTION...

Government of Maharashtra for evincing its interest 
Rights Education for all. I extend my thanks to all the authorities of the University for 
granting permission to 
 
in the promotion of Human 
launch the programme across the Departments. I also extend 
my thanks to the members of the Human Rights Education Committee for their rich 
contribution in making the programme a success. Last but not the least, I appreciate 
the constant efforts of the coordinator of the programme, Dr. T.S.N. Sastry, Professor 
of Law & Former Head, Department of Law, and its faculty, staff and students for their 
continuous sustained support. 
The University being the first in the country to offer this type of programme 
with the blessings of the Government of Maharashtra, I sincerely hope that the pupil 
after undergoing the course will reflect the sentiments of the University in the 
enrichment of Human Rights of various sections of people in the Country. 
Vice Chancellor 
      University of Pune
Dr.  W.  N. Gade

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS...
Human rights became the cornerstone of every 
country since their adoption by United Nations. However, 
states being the representative organs of people, the rights 
guaranteed by international law of human rights need to be 
institutionalized to augment the rights of everyone at the 
national domain. By such institutionalization with a 
constitutional guarantee, they try to protect the fragile nature 
of individual against the national and international threats. 
In a multi kaleidoscopic cultural society of modern India, to weed out the 
differences to bring in the concept of equality in its true perspective, the judiciary 
over the years played a crucial role to bridge the trade off between the justiciable (Part 
III Fundamental Rights) and non-justiciable rights (Part IV Directive Principles of 
State Policy) to achieve the cherished goals of the preamble of the constitution and in 
tune with the philosophical orientation of International Law of Human Rights to 
protect individual's rights at all times from every kind of threat. 
The ideological leanings of the constitution to promote and protect the life 
and liberty of individual at any cost and to counter the threats, in the last six decades 
the legislative and executive organs did their best by establishing a varied statutory 
mechanisms (establishment of various Human Rights oriented commissions) to wipe 
out the discriminatory practices and to protect every individual from the 
countenance of threats for the furtherance of human rights.
However, economical, social and cultural differences that exist in the society 
pose problems at times to fully exploit the human capabilities in their free exercise of 
legally guaranteed rights. Prof. Lakshminath maintains that, 'law' being the pivotal 
armor of society, the governmental promises cannot fulfill the legal assurance 
without the active participation of civil society. 'Civil society' includes human 
associations and a set of relational networks formed to aid and assist the victims of 
human rights through the guaranteed legal mechanism in order to counter the 
subordination of authority of state and therefore to demand  political structures. To 
fulfill the above aspirations, this  third book in the series of Human Rights Education 
programme subtly presents the legal and policy formulations of India in the 
enforcement of Human Rights with the necessary institutional mechanism.
Education being the fifth estate of a democracy, the University of Pune is of 
the opinion that after completing the course, the pupil of its will play their role as 
actors of the civil society to aid and assist victims of human rights not only to seek the 
assistance of legally guaranteed mechanism but also help the state in the furtherance 

of human rights. The University initiated the project of HRE for all. The sole objective 
is to promote and propagate Human Rights to bring a duty based society with out 
any profit-making business. The pictures presented are used from the various web 
resources of the UN and its organs, International, National, Non- Governmental 
Organisations, search engines and other websites sites to convey the message of 
Human Rights in an easy and understandable perspective. In this regard, the author 
expresses his gratitude to all the authors whose materials have been consulted and 
the websites have been  browsed.
I express my sincere thanks to His Excellency to the Chancellor and  the 
Governor of Maharashtra and the State of Maharashtra for supporting the venture of 
the University of Pune and providing an opportunity to serve in the cultural heart 
land of the State of Maharashtra.I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all 
the authorities of the University of Pune and the Hon'ble Vice Chancellor Dr. W.S. 
Gade for reposing the trust and permitting me to continue my work as a Coordinator 
of the HRE programme of the University.  I also sincerely express my thanks to all the 
members of the HRE Programme of the University, and to all my colleagues of the 
University for seriously implementing the programme and making it a grand 
success.
I am indebted to the former Vice Chancellors of the University, Dr. R. K. 
Shevgaonkar and Dr. Sanjay Chahande for their constant encouragement and vision 
in the promotion of the programme. I also express my gratitude to my colleague Dr. 
D.S. Ukey Former Acting Vice Chancellor of SRTM University of Nanded, Professor 
and Head of the Department of Law, University of Pune for his constant support in 
myendeavors. I express my thanks to Mr. Ajay Sonawane , Teaching Associate of the 
Human Rights Education Programme, Faculty and Non-Teaching Staff of the 
Department of Law. My sincere thanks is also to Dr. S.R. Bhosale Chairman, Board of 
Studies and Dr. Rasheed Shaikh, Dean, Faculty of Law, University of Pune, the 
administrative authorities of the University, Mr. Dattatraya Kute, Manager and staff 
of the University of Pune Press for publishing this book with utmost sincerity. 
Last but not the least, if any unintentional errors are crept in I am alone 
responsible. Your valuable comments and suggestions if any with respect to the 
improvement of content and quality of work will be highly appreciated. 
 
Dr. T.S.N. Sastry
Professor and Coordinator of 
Human Rights Education Programme,
Department of Law, University of Pune    

Syllabi Course III
Credit: 1
Human Rights and Duties in India: Law, Policy, Society and Enforcement 
Mechanism
I. Human Rights in Indian Context 
a) Indian Bill of Rights and Sarvodaya 
b) Preamble- Fundamental Rights- Directive Principles-Fundamental Duties 
II. Human Rights- Enforcement Mechanism 
a) Human Rights Act, 1993 
b) Judicial Organs- Supreme Court (Art 32) and High Courts (Art 226) 
c) Human Rights Commission- National and State of Maharashtra 
d) Commissions of Women, children, Minority, SC/ST 
e) Survey of International Mechanism 
III. Human Rights Violations and Indian Polity 
a) Inequalities in society-population-illiteracy-poverty-caste-inaccessibility 
of legal redress 
b) Abuse of Executive Power-Corruption-Nepotism and favoritism 
c) Human Rights and Good Governance 
IV. Role of Advocacy Groups 
a) Professional Bodies: Press, Media, Role of Lawyers-Legal Aid 
b) Educational Institutions 
c) Role of Corporate Sector 
d) Non-Governmental Organisations

CONTENTS 
FOREWORD  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
SYLLABI OF THE COURSE
   
   Page No.
HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN CONTEXT
1-41
1.
Introduction
1
2.
Indian Bill of Rights
1
3.
Meaning and concept of Sarvodaya
5
4.
A brief introduction to the constitution
6
5.
Preamble
7
6.
Fundamental Rights
8 
7.
Directive Principles of the State Policy
25
8.
Fundamental Duties 
36
9.
Sum Up
40
MODEL QUESTIONS
41
HUMAN RIGHTS: ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM
42-62
1.
Brief Overview of Human Rights : Issues in India
42
2.
National Human Rights Act 1993
43
3.
Judicial Organs
43
4.
National Human Rights Commission
48
5.
Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission
49
6.
Commissions on Women, Children, Minority and Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes 
50
7.
National Commission for Women 
51
8.
Maharashtra State Commission for Women
51
9.
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
52
10. Maharashtra State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
53 
11. National Commission for Minorities
54 
12. National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
55
13. Survey of International Mechanism
57
14. Sum Up
61
MODEL QUESTIONS
62
INTRODUCTION 
UNIT I
UNIT II

UNIT III
UNIT IV 
OBSTACLES TO HUMAN RIGHTS AND INDIAN POLITY
     63-81
1.
Inequalities in society and Human Rights
63
a.
Population
64
b. Poverty
66
c.
Caste 
69
d. Inaccessibility to Legal Redress
71
2.
Abuse of Executive Power-Corruption-Nepotism or Favoritism 
73
3.
Human Rights and Good Governance 
77
4.
Sum Up
80
MODEL QUESTIONS
81
ROLE OF ADVOCACY GROUPS
     82-96
1.
Introduction
82
2.
Role of Advocacy Groups
83
3.
Professional Bodies
83
a.
Media
83
b. Role of Lawyers-Legal Aid
86
c.
Educational Institutions
88
d. Role of Corporate Sector
90
e.
NGOS’
93
4.
Sum Up
95
MODEL QUESTIONS
96
Conclusion
97
References
                  98-99
Websites Referred
      99-103

Human Rights in Indian Context
UNIT  I
1
UNIT  I
HUMAN RIGHTS IN INDIAN CONTEXT
This unit will introduce to the students, the development of human rights in the Indian context. 
It also further introduces the Indian perspective of social theory and justice as founded by a 
number of statesmen. It will also subtly discuss the contribution and significance of Sarvodaya 
for the development of human rights movement in India and the Constitutional provisions 
dealing with Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles of State Policy and Fundamental 
duties evolved by the Constitutional framers on the lines of the International Law of Human 
Rights.
1.  Introduction:
2.  Indian Bill of Rights
The concept of Human Rights is not new to India. It is 
inherent part of socio, economic and cultural life of Indian 
society. A number of religious, literary, social and 
philosophical texts from ancient to modern times advocated 
the concept based on 'Duty', in contrast to that of the Western 
culture of Rights. After independence, the framers of 
constitution, taking into consideration of both Eastern and 
Western philosophies, have developed Human Rights 
concept to suit according to the needs of Indian polity.
The Indian Constitution, compared to that of 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was ahead in bifurcating civil and political 
rights and economic, social and cultural rights as independent units of the constitution. 
In a way, the division of both sets of rights advocated by Indian constitution, paved the 
way for United Nations to undertake steps on the lines of Indian perspective and 
bifurcated them as two independent sets of rights in 1966, as Covenant on Economic, 
Social, Cultural Rights and Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
 The legal and other texts of ancient and medieval India advocated duty as the 
prime concept for augmentation of rights of the individual through the legal tenet of 
'Dharma'. However, the arrival of foreign rulers and their divide and rule policy 
brought in disastrous results for the promotion and protection of individual rights in 
the modern period.
 
To resist the policies of colonial masters and to drive them from the country, 
'Indian National Congress' was established in 1885. A number of movements have 
 

Human Rights in Indian Context
2
been initiated under its banner to release the people from the bondage of colonial rule 
and to restore the rights of people at every level. Among the various movements, the 
Purna Swaraj  and the Home Rule Movement richly contributed for the development 
of Indian Bill of Rights. In this regard, the report prepared by Mr. Motilal Nehru in 
1928 enumerated certain rights that were to be conferred upon the Indian subjects by 
British colonial Masters. The rights that were enumerated in the report of Nehru are 
popularly referred to as 'Indian Bill of Rights'.  In a way, they received a significant 
consideration while drafting the constitution by the constituent assembly. The Rights 
advocated by The  bill are as follows:
Ø
(i) All powers of government and all authority, legislative, executive and 
judicial, are derived from the people and the same shall be exercised in the 
Commonwealth of India through the organizations established by or under, 
and in due process of this constitution. (Right to democracy)
Ø
No person shall be deprived of his liberty nor shall his dwelling or property be 
entered, sequestered or confiscated, save in accordance with law. All titles to 
private and personal property lawfully acquired and enjoyed at the 
establishment of the commonwealth are hereby guaranteed.  (Comparable to 
various freedoms under Article 19 and Right to Liberty under Article 21)
Ø
Freedom of conscience and the free profession and practice of religion are, 
subject to public order or morality, hereby guaranteed to every 
person.(Comparable to Article 19 and 25 )
Ø
The right of free expression of opinion, as well as the right to assemble 
peaceably and without arms, and to form associations or unions, is hereby 
guaranteed for purposes not opposed to public order or morality. (Comparable 
to Article 19 )
Ø
All citizens in the Commonwealth of India have the right to free elementary 
education without any distinction of caste or creed in the matter of admission 
into any educational institutions, maintained or aided by the state, and such 
rights shall be enforceable as soon as due arrangement shall have been made by 
competent authority. Provided that adequate provision shall be made by the 
state for impairing public instruction in primary schools to the children of 
members of minorities of considerable strength in the population through the 
medium of their own language and in such script as is in vague among them. 
(Comparable to Article 21A )

Human Rights in Indian Context
3
Ø
All citizens are equal before law and posses equal civic rights.(Comparable to 
Article 14)
Ø
There shall be no penal law whether substantive or procedural of a 
discriminative nature. (Comparable to Article 20)
Ø
No person shall be punished for any act which was not punishable under the 
law at the time it was committed. (Comparable to Article 20)
Ø
No corporal punishment or other punishment involving torture of any kind 
shall be lawful. (Comparable to Article 21)
Ø
Every citizen shall have a right to a writ of habeas corpus. Such right may be 
suspended in the case of war or rebellion by an Act of the central legislature or, 
if the legislature is not in session, by the Governor- General-in-Council, and in 
such case he shall report the suspension to the legislature, at the earliest 
possible opportunity for such action as it may deem fit. (Comparable to Article 
32 and 226 )
Ø
There shall be no state religion for the Commonwealth of India or for any 
province in the Commonwealth, nor shall the state directly or indirectly endow 
any religion or give any preference or impose any disability on account of 
religious belief or religious status. (Secularism advocated in the Preamble of 
the  Constitution)
Ø
No person attending any school receiving state aid or other public money shall 
be compelled to attend the religious instruction that may be given in the 
school.( Minority rights ,Comparable to Article 28)
Ø
No person shall by reason of his religion, caste or creed shall be prejudiced in 
any way in regard to public employment, office of power or honour and the 
exercise of any trade or calling. (Right to employment without discrimination; 
Comparable to Article 16)
Ø
All citizens are equal before law and posses equal civic rights.(Comparable to 
Article 14 )
Ø
There shall be no penal law whether substantive or procedural of a 
discriminative nature. (Comparable to Article 20 )
Ø
No person shall be punished for any act which was not punishable under the 
law at the time it was committed. (Comparable to Article 20 )

Human Rights in Indian Context
4
Ø
No corporal punishment or other punishment involving torture of any kind 
shall be lawful. (Comparable to Article 21)
Ø
Every citizen shall have a right to a writ of habeas corpus. Such right may be 
suspended in the case of war or rebellion by an Act of the central legislature or, 
if the legislature is not in session, by the Governor- General-in-Council, and in 
such case he shall report the suspension to the legislature, at the earliest 
possible opportunity for such action as it may deem fit. (Comparable to Article 
32 and 226)
Ø
There shall be no state religion for the Commonwealth of India or for any 
province in the Commonwealth, nor shall the state directly or indirectly endow 
any religion or give any preference or impose any disability on account of 
religious belief or religious status. (Secularism advocated in the Preamble )
Ø
All citizens have an equal right of access to, and use of, public roads, public 
wells and all other places of public resort.(Comparable to Article 15 )
Ø
Freedom of combination and association for the maintenance and 
improvement of labour and economic conditions is guaranteed to everyone 
and of all occupations. All agreements and measures tending to restrict or 
obstruct such freedom are illegal. (Comparable to a number of  Directive 
principles of State policy )
Ø
No breach of contract of service or abetment thereof shall be made a criminal 
offence. (Comparable to Article 21 )
Ø
Parliament shall make suitable laws for the maintenance of health and fitness 
for work of all citizens, securing of a living wage for every worker, the 
protection of motherhood, welfare of children; and the economic 
consequences of old age, infirmity and unemployment and Parliament shall 
also make laws to ensure fair rent and fixity and permanence of tenure to 
agricultural tenants. (Comparable to a number of Directive principles of State 
Policy)
Ø
Every citizen shall have the right to keep and bear arms in accordance with the 
regulations made in that behalf. (Right to Arms which does not exist in the 
Constitution)
1
Ø
Men and Women shall have equal rights as citizens.  (Comparable to article 14) 

Human Rights in Indian Context
5
3.  Meaning and Concept of Sarvodaya
The term Sarvodaya is indigenous in its origin. It is derived from the two- 
different words. They are sarva and udaya. Sarva means all and udaya means rise. In 
short, Sarvodaya means 'universal upliftment of all'. Mahatma Gandhi first coined this 
term in 1908 while translating the work of John Ruskin's tract on political economy 
'Unto this Last'.
Gandhi employed this term in 
order to give a modern basis to the ancient 
Indian philosophy of Sarvadharma-
s a m a n t v a  o r  S a r v a b h u t a h i t a .  
Conceptually, the philosophy of 
sarvodaya aims at achieving the welfare 
of all sections of people of a polity with 
the aid and assistance of social and legal 
institutions in a peaceful manner. Gandhi 
referred this in short as true ahimsa. This 
principle of Gandhi became popular, inculcated and propagated by a number of 
leaders in India and abroad. It became a cornerstone for a number of contemporary 
movements of Human Rights across the world. 
Gandhi has laid the foundation for Sarvodaya 
movement firmly on the principles of Truth, Non-
violence, and love, which has eternal value. The 
Sarvodaya concept became the fundamental principle of 
freedom movement of India. Amongst various 
statesmen, Acharya Vinoba Bhave , Jayprakash 
Narayanan, Dadasaheb Dharmadhikari, Dhirendra 
Mazumdaar, Shankarrao Deo, K. G. Mashruwala, etc., 
pursued the path of the philosophical objects of 
sarvodaya even after independence. The Gramdan and 
Bhudan movements initiated by Acharya Vinoba Bhave, were the popular movements 
aimed to achieve the concept of welfare of peasants and landless people, and, received 
legal sanction.
1.  https://sites.google.com/site/cabinetmissionplan/nehru-report-1928-full-text/doc1
Acharya Vinoba Bhave

Human Rights in Indian Context
6
After the death of Acharya Vinoba Bhave, 
'Jayaprakash Narayan' took the mantle on his 
shoulders to achieve the concept of Sarvodaya. 
He went a step further and advocated that apart 
from Bhoodan movement, the state need to 
empower villages as self-sufficient units for the 
long-term sustainability of economy of the 
nation. He felt that this is the most important 
aspect of Sarvodaya, and it is the dream of 
Gandhi who advocated this concept to achieve self-sufficiency of the country for the 
all round development of economy and the people which in turn, augment Human 
Rights of everyone without much interference of  state.
The concept of Sarvodaya has its own mark in many forms in the independent 
India. The various five-year plans, the number of schemes and programmes initiated 
rd
th
by government both at national and state level have centered round it. The 73  and 74  
Constitutional amendments dealing with empowerment of Gram Swaraj etc. are the 
philosophical tenets of Sarvodaya. However, lack of commitment to implement the 
concept in its true perspective has brought in number of problems in the contemporary 
era. In order to make India a self reliant, vibrant democratic polity, it is the duty of 
every one of us to adhere strictly to the principle of Sarvodaya. By practicing 
Sarvodaya, will not only wipe many of the miseries that are currently affecting the 
polity but also help to bloom the rights of all sections of people in order to realize the 
social justice philosophy advocated by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in the preamble of the 
Constitution.
The Constitution of India was drafted under the supervision of the Constituent 
Assembly. Originally, the Constitution Assembly consisted of 389 members. 
However as a result of partition under Lord Mountbatten Plan on June 3, 1947, a 
separate Constitutional Assembly was set up for Pakistan. As a result, the membership 
of Constitutional Assembly of India was reduced to 299. The Chairman of the 
Constituent Assembly was Dr. Rajendra Prasad who later became the first President of 
independent India. In order to draft the Constitution, a Drafting Committee was set up 
th
on 29  August 1947. The Chairman of Drafting Committee was Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. 
Along with him , six other members were chosen to draft the Constitution. The other 
members were Pandit Govind Ballabh Pant, K.M. Munshi, Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer, 
4.  A brief introduction to the Constitution
Jayaprakash Narayan

Human Rights in Indian Context
7
N. Gopalaswami Ayengar, B.L. Mitter, MD Sadullah, D.P. Khaitan. Sir Benegal 
Narsing Rau was appointed as the Constitutional Advisor to assist the Constitutional 
Assembely and the Drafting Committee, who later became the First Indian to become 
a judge of the International Court of Justice in 1952. Drafting committee completed 
task of drafting constitution in 2 years, 11 months and 17 days. The draft prepared by 
th
the drafting committee was later adopted by Constitutional Assembly on 26  
th
1
November, 1949 and the constitution came into force on  26  January 1950.  
The Constitution is described as quasi-federal by Prof. K.C. Wheare, an American 
Constitutional expert since it has both federal and unitary features in its structure. In 
the words of Granville Austine, a famous Constitutional jurist of India, 'the Indian 
Constitution is described as 'federal in times of peace and unitary in times of war'. 
However strictly speaking, the constitution may be best described as a co-operative 
federation. The constitution in all has 395 Articles and 12 Schedules.
Preamble means, introductory statement of a  constitution, which  sets  out in 
detail the underlying facts and assumptions, 
and explains its intent and objectives. Its 
objective is to clarify the meaning or purpose of 
the operative part of the text in case of an 
ambiguity or dispute. According to the 
preamble, the power of sovereignty lies solely 
with the people of India and not in any 
institution of the government created either by 
constitution or by a statute. Hence, none of the 
organizations of the government including the 
Parliament of India created by constitution is 
sovereign. According to the original 
constitution, India described as Sovereign, 
Democratic, Republic. The sovereignty lies with the people, and there is neither a 
hereditary monarch nor any individual can claim authority permanently. This means a 
republican constitution connotes that, the people through their representatives choose 
a government including President of the country at regular periodical intervals as 
5.  Preamble
1 For details see, http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/facts.htm 

Human Rights in Indian Context
8
stipulated by the constitution.
The words 'Socialist and Secular' inserted to preamble by Forty-second 
Amendment to the constitution in the year 1976. Further, it substituted the expression 
of 'unity of the nation' with the expression 'unity and integrity of the nation'. Thus, the 
present Preamble reads as stated in the picture.
The Constitution of India was the first constitution to incorporate the ideals of 
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 
indigenous socio-political-economic, legal and cultural reflections of the country. The 
Constitution of India was the first in the world to bifurcate the Justiciable (civil and 
political rights as Fundamental Right) and non-Justiciable (economic, social and 
cultural rights as Directive Principles of State Policy) human rights that declared in the 
UDHR without any bifurcation. The Constitution of India in tune with the principles 
of international law of human rights imposed the responsibility on the state for the 
realization of the non-Justiciable rights through Article 38. This bifurcation and the 
inclusion of the non-Justiciable rights in the constitution is  the vision of Constituent 
Assembly to provide a better life to the people wherein the socio-economic justice will 
be available to all without any discrimination in tune with preamble of the 
constitution. The philosophy of the fundamental rights advocated by the assembly is to 
ensure that the liberty of citizens is to fulfill at all times in a realistic perspective and 
not a mere promise. The assurance led the judiciary to further ensure a strict vigil that 
the goals of the framers of the constitution are fulfilled without much deviance. 
Therefore, in a nutshell, the Preamble not only represents the aspirations of people of 
India but also ensures realization of the goals to match with that of the jurisprudential 
vistas of International Law of Human Rights.
Jurisprudentially, the history of rights forms part of natural law which dates back 
to evolution of mankind.  However, the philosophical differences and the suppression 
of individual rights by sovereigns across the world gave birth to the modern concept of 
Human Rights with the adoption of Magna Carta in 1215. From then onwards a 
number of declarations, conventions and constitutional documents gave impetus for 
the development of human rights in municipal sphere. However, the lack of 
recognition by international community led to a number of wars destabilized not only 
the liberties of individuals, but also peace and security. 
In order to ensure and to achieve peace and security, the prime concept of 
international law, framers of the Charter of United Nations gave impetus to natural 
6.  Fundamental Rights: 

Human Rights in Indian Context
9
rights by naming them as Human Rights. In order 
to further, reiterate its commitment to foster 
respect for rights of individuals, in the year 1948, 
United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. The mandate of UDHR is to fix 
responsibility on nation-states that the civil and 
political rights; economic, social, cultural rights be 
guaranteed to people of the world in order to bloom 
peace and security. It also mandated on the 
individuals, in realizing the Rights they need to 
observe duties without any deviance through 
Article 29 of UDHR.
The constituent assembly by taking into 
consideration of philosophical ethos of India and 
that of international community incorporated the 
philosophy of Human Rights in the constitution as Fundamental Rights and Directive 
Principles of State Policy. The concept of Duties was not part of the original 
nd
constitution. However, it has been incorporated to the constitution through 42  
amendment in 1976.
The provisions related to fundamental rights (which described as civil and 
political rights) are found in Articles 12 to 35, 226, 358 and 359 of the Indian 
Constitution. These fundamental rights are a mixture of international philosophy of 
Human Rights, the Charter of the United Nations and indigenous to suit the Indian 
polity. Among the various rights that has stated in the Indian Constitution, some of 
them are equivalent to the International Declarations and Covenants. 
Here under, a comparative table is presented for an easy understanding of 
Fundamental Rights which are equivalent to civil and  political rights at the 
international level. 

Human Rights in Indian Context
10
NAME OF THE 
FUNDAMENTAL 
RIGHT  AND 
ARTICLE IN 
THE INDIAN 
CONSTITUTION
EQUIVALENT /NEAR  
COMPARABLE ARTICLES 
IN UNIVERSAL 
DECLARATION OF 
HUMAN RIGHTS, 1948
EQUIVALENT/ NEAR  
COMPARABLE ARTICLES 
IN INTERNATIONAL 
COVENANT ON CIVIL AND 
POLITICAL RIGHTS, 1966
Article  14: The 
State shall not 
deny to any 
person equality 
before the law or 
the equal 
protection of the 
laws within the 
territory of India
Article 7: All are equal 
before the law and are 
entitled without any 
discrimination to equal 
protection of the law. All are 
entitled to equal protection 
against any discrimination in 
violation of this Declaration 
and against any incitement to 
such discrimination.
Article 14(1): All persons 
shall be equal before the 
courts and tribunals. In the 
determination of any criminal 
charge against him, or of his 
rights and obligations in a suit 
at law, everyone shall be 
entitled to a fair and public 
hearing by a competent, 
independent and impartial 
tribunal established by law. 
The press and the public may 
be excluded from all or part of 
a trial for reasons of morals, 
public order (order public) or 
national security in a 
democratic society, or when 
the interest of the private lives 
of the parties so requires, or to 
the extent strictly necessary in 
the opinion of the court in 
special circumstances where 
publicity would prejudice the 
interests of justice; but any 
judgment rendered in a 
criminal case or in a suit at 
law shall be made public 
except where the interest of 
juvenile persons otherwise 
requires or the proceedings 
concern matrimonial disputes 
or the guardianship of 
children.

Human Rights in Indian Context
11
Article 15(1): The 
State shall not 
discriminate 
against any citizen 
on grounds only 
of religion, race, 
caste, sex, place 
of birth or any of 
them.
Article 2: Everyone is 
entitled to all the rights and 
freedoms set forth in this 
Declaration, without 
distinction of any kind, such 
as race, colour, sex, 
language, religion, political 
or other opinion, national or 
social origin, property, birth 
or other status.
Article 2: Everyone is entitled 
to all the rights and freedoms 
set forth in this Declaration, 
without distinction of any 
kind, such as race, colour, sex, 
language, religion, political or 
other opinion, national or 
social origin, property, birth or 
other status. 
Article 16(1): 
There shall be 
equality of 
opportunity for all 
citizens in matters 
relating to 
employment or 
appointment to 
any office under 
the State.
Article 23 (1): Everyone has 
the right to work, to free 
choice of employment, to 
just and favourable 
conditions of work and to 
protection against 
unemployment. 
Article 25: Every citizen shall 
have the right and the 
opportunity, without any of 
the distinctions mentioned in 
article 2 and without 
unreasonable restrictions.
© To have access, on general 
terms of equality, to public 
service in his country.
Freedom of 
speech and 
expression- 19 (1) 
(a) All citizens 
shall have the 
right to freedom 
of speech and 
expression.
Article 19: Everyone has the 
right to freedom of opinion 
and expression; this right 
includes freedom to hold 
opinions without interference 
and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas 
through any media and 
regardless of frontiers.
Article 19: (1) Everyone shall 
have the right to hold opinions 
without interference. 
2. Everyone shall have the 
right to freedom of 
expression; this right shall 
include freedom to seek, 
receive and impart 
information and ideas of all 
kinds, regardless of frontiers, 
either orally, in writing or in 
print, in the form of art, or 
through any other media of 
his choice.

Human Rights in Indian Context
12
Article 19 (1)(b):  
All citizens shall 
have the right to 
assemble 
peaceably and 
without arms.
Article 20: 
1. Everyone has the right to 
freedom of peaceful 
assembly and association. 
2. No one may be compelled 
to belong to an association.
Article 21: The right of 
peaceful assembly shall be 
recognized. No restrictions 
may be placed on the exercise 
of this right other than those 
imposed in conformity with 
the law and which are 
necessary in a democratic 
society in the interests of 
national security or public 
safety, public order (ordre 
public), the protection of 
public health or morals or the 
protection of the rights and 
freedoms of others.
Art. 19 (1)(c):  All 
citizens shall have 
the right to form 
associations or 
unions.     
Article 19: Everyone has the 
right to freedom of opinion 
and expression; this right 
includes freedom to hold 
opinions without interference 
and to seek, receive and 
impart information and ideas 
through any media and 
regardless of frontiers.
Article 19: (1) Everyone shall 
have the right to hold opinions 
without interference. 
2. Everyone shall have the right 
to freedom of expression; this 
right shall include freedom to 
seek, receive and impart 
information and ideas of all 
kinds, regardless of frontiers, 
either orally, in writing or in 
print, in the form of art, or 
through any other media of his 
choice.
Article 19 (1)(b): 
All citizens shall 
have the right to 
a s s e m b l e
peaceably and 
without arms.
Article 20: 
1. Everyone has the right to 
freedom of peaceful assembly 
and association. 
2. No one may be compelled 
to belong to an association.
Article 21: The right of 
peaceful assembly shall be 
recognized. No restrictions 
may be placed on the exercise 
of this right other than those 
imposed in conformity with the 
law and which are necessary in 
a democratic society in the 
interests of national security or 
public safety, public order 

Human Rights in Indian Context
13
public health or morals or the 
protection of the rights and 
freedoms of others.
Art. 19 (1)(c):  All 
citizens shall have 
the right to form 
associations or 
unions.
Article 23(4):  Everyone has 
the right to form and to join 
trade unions for the protection 
of 
his interests.
Article 22(1):. Everyone shall 
have the right to freedom of 
association with others, 
including the right to form and 
join trade unions for the 
protection of his interests.
Art. 19(1) : All 
citizens shall have 
the right : (d)to 
m o v e  f r e e l y  
throughout the 
territory of India; 
e)  to reside and 
settle in any part of 
the territory of 
India.
Article 13 (1): Everyone has 
the right to freedom of 
movement and residence 
within the borders of each 
State.
Article 12(1): Everyone 
lawfully within the territory of 
a State shall, within that 
territory, have the right to 
liberty of movement and 
freedom to choose his 
residence.
Art. 19 (1)(g)
All citizens shall 
have the right to 
practise any 
profession, or to 
carry on any 
occupation, trade 
or business.
Article 23(1): Everyone has 
the right to work, to free 
choice of employment, to 
just and favorable conditions 
of work and to protection 
against unemployment.
Article 20 (1): No 
person shall be 
convicted of any 
offence except for 
violation of a law 
in force at the time 
of the commission 
of the Act charged 
as an offence, nor 
be subjected to a 
penalty greater 
than that which 
might have been 
inflicted under the 
law in force at the 
t i m e  o f  t h e  
commission of the 
offence. 
Article11 (2): No one shall be 
held guilty of any penal 
offence on account of any act 
or omission which did not 
constitute a penal offence, 
under national or international 
law, at the time when it was 
committed. Nor shall a 
heavier penalty be imposed 
than the one that was 
applicable at the time the 
penal offence was committed.
Article 15
1. No one shall be held guilty 
of any criminal offence on 
account of any act or omission 
which did not constitute a 
criminal offence, under 
national or international law, 
at the time when it was 
committed. Nor shall a 
heavier penalty be imposed 
than the one that was 
applicable at the time when 
the criminal offence was 
committed. 
 

Human Rights in Indian Context
14
Article 20 (2) No 
person shall be 
prosecuted and 
punished for the 
same offence 
more than once
Article 14 (7) :  No one shall 
be liable to be tried or 
punished again for an offence 
for which he has already been 
finally convicted or acquitted 
in accordance with the law 
Article 20 (3) No 
person accused of 
any offence shall 
be compelled to 
be a witness 
against himself.
Article 14 (3):  In the 
determination of any criminal 
charge against him, everyone 
shall be entitled to the 
following minimum 
guarantees, in full equality: 
(a) To be informed promptly 
and in detail in a language 
which he understands of the 
nature and cause of the charge 
Article 21 : No 
person shall be 
deprived of his life 
or personal liberty 
except according 
t o  p r o c e d u r e  
established by law.
Article 3: Everyone has the 
right to life, liberty and 
security of person.
Article 6 (1): Every human 
being has the inherent right to 
life. This right shall be 
protected by law. No one shall 
be arbitrarily deprived of his 
life.
Article 9(1): Everyone has 
the right to liberty and 
security of person. No one 
shall be subjected to arbitrary 
arrest or detention. No one 
shall be deprived of his liberty 
except on such grounds and in 
Article 21 A: 
The State shall 
provide free and 
compulsory 
education to all 
children of the age 
of six to fourteen 
years in such 
manner as the 
State may, by law, 
determine.
Article 26 :
Everyone has the right to 
education. Education shall be 
free, at least in the 
elementary and fundamental 
stages. Elementary education 
shall be compulsory
 
 
 

Human Rights in Indian Context
15
Article 22 (1) : No 
person who is arrested 
shall be detained in 
custody without being 
informed, as soon as 
may be, of the grounds 
for such arrest nor shall 
he be denied the right to 
consult, and to be 
defended by, a legal 
practitioner of his 
choice.
(2) Every person who is 
arrested and detained in 
custody shall be 
produced before the 
nearest magistrate within 
a period of twenty-four 
hours of such arrest 
excluding the time 
necessary for the journey 
from the place of arrest 
to the court of the 
magistrate and no such 
person shall be detained 
in custody beyond the 
said period without the 
authority of a magistrate.
Article 9: No one 
shall be subjected to 
arbitrary arrest, 
detention or exile.
Article 9 (2) Anyone who is 
arrested shall be informed, at 
the time of arrest, of the 
reasons for his arrest and shall 
be promptly informed of any 
charges against him.
(3) Anyone arrested or 
detained on a criminal charge 
shall be brought promptly 
before a judge or other officer 
authorized by law to exercise 
judicial power and shall be 
entitled to trial within a 
reasonable time or to release. 
(4) Anyone who is deprived of 
his liberty by arrest or 
detention shall be entitled to 
take proceedings before a 
court, in order that that court 
may decide without delay on 
the lawfulness of his detention 
and order his release if the 
detention is not lawful.
Article23 (1): Traffic in 
human beings and begar 
and other similar forms 
of forced labour are 
prohibited and any 
contravention of this 
provision shall be an 
offence punishable in 
accordance with law.
Article 8(3)(a) No one shall 
be required to perform forced 
or compulsory labour.
 

Human Rights in Indian Context
16
Article 25: (1) 
Subject to public 
order, morality 
and health and to 
the other 
provisions of this 
Part, all persons 
are equally 
entitled to 
freedom of 
conscience and 
the right
freely to profess, 
p r a c t i s e  a n d  
propagate religion.
Article 18: Everyone has the 
right to freedom of thought, 
conscience and religion; this 
right  includes freedom to 
change his religion or belief, 
and freedom, either alone or 
in  community with others 
and in public or private, to 
manifest his religion or belief 
in teaching, practice, worship 
and observance.
Article 18: (1) Everyone shall 
have the right to freedom of 
thought, conscience and 
religion. This right shall 
include freedom to have or to 
adopt a religion or belief of his 
choice, and freedom, either 
individually or in community 
with others and in public or 
private, to manifest his religion 
o r  b e l i e f  i n  w o r s h i p ,  
observance, practice and 
teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to 
coercion which would impair 
his freedom to have or to 
adopt a religion or belief of 
his choice.
Article 32:
(1) The right to 
move the Supreme 
Court by 
appropriate 
proceedings for 
the enforcement 
of the rights 
conferred by this 
Part is guaranteed. 
Article 8 : 
Everyone has the right to an 
effective remedy by the 
competent national tribunals 
for acts violating the 
fundamental rights granted 
him by the Constitution or by 
law.
Article 2(3).:
Each State Party to the present 
Covenant undertakes: (a) To 
ensure that any person whose 
rights or freedoms as herein 
recognized are violated shall 
have an effective remedy, 
notwithstanding that the 
violation has been committed 
by persons acting in an 
official capacity; (b) To ensure 
that any person claiming such 
a remedy shall have his right 
thereto determined by 
competent judicial, 
administrative or legislative 
authorities, or by any other 
competent authority provided 
for by the legal system of the 
State, and to develop the 
possibilities of judicial 
remedy.  

Human Rights in Indian Context
17
According to provisions of the constitution, the fundamental rights which are 
equivalent to that of the civil and political rights of international law of human rights, 
they constitute as 'claim rights'. The claims can be made against the state and its 
various agencies. These claims can be made by individuals and by legal persons 
(institutes or agencies created by Law). However, the legal persons have only limited 
rights that are guaranteed by law.
For the purpose of claim, the rights guaranteed under the constitution, a state 
constitutes, the government of the Union and the States or any agency or an institute 
that receives funding by the government under Article 12 of the Constitution of India 
as interpreted by the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (AIR 
1981 SC 487).
Article 13 is the cornerstone of all fundamental rights. This article imposes a 
restriction on the state not to enact any law that constitutes an infringement to 
fundamental rights. This article empowers the judiciary to keep a vigil on the acts of 
state and its agencies to nullify any law, which brings in any kind of unreasonable 
restriction on the free exercise of fundamental rights. 
Equality constitutes an important 
ingredient for the free exercise of fundamental 
rights. This means all people are equal in the 
eyes of law and have equal protection of laws. 
According to Dicey, though a section of 
people may enjoy certain preferential 
treatment for justifiable reasons, the concept 
of equality cannot be construed as 
discriminatory in nature.
Equal protection of laws connotes that all persons placed in a similar situation 
will have a nexus with the purpose for which the law is enacted. Accordingly, the 
concept of equal protection of laws does not mean that the same laws will be 
applicable to all persons on an equal footing. The concept of equality under Article 14 
is applicable to citizens and as well to foreigners. 
Right to Equality: 

Human Rights in Indian Context
18
The concept of right to equality is dealt 
under Articles 14 to 18 of constitution.  In these 
articles, certain concessions are extended to 
various sections of people taking into 
consideration of their socio, economic, politico, 
cultural backgrounds. The concessions extended 
to those groups of people are applicable only to 
them. The philosophy behind these concessions 
is to uplift the disadvantaged groups on par with 
other socially developed groups. This type of concessions extended to various groups 
is fully justified under the concept of equality. Equality being a wider concept of law, 
laws can be applied only between equals on an equal footing but not between equals 
and unequal.  
This article empathetically endorses the perception of 
equality before law as stated under article 14. At the same 
time, it clearly justifies concessions that are extended to 
women, children, socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens and scheduled castes and scheduled tribes 
as reasonable classification to wipe out their inequalities in 
applying the spirit of equality before law and equal protection 
of laws. Therefore the concessions extended to various groups of people in no way 
constitutes discriminatory.
This article is a further extension to meet 
the requirements of equality under article 14. 
According to this article, all the citizens should 
be given an equal opportunity in public 
employment without any kind of discrimination. 
However, concession extended to various 
groups by state under this article no way 
constitutes discrimination to the general 
philosophy of equality among the citizens. At the 
Prohibition of Discrimination under Article 15 :
Equality of Opportunity in matters of public employment under Article 16:
 

Human Rights in Indian Context
19
same time it has to be remembered, this article in no way confreres a right on citizens to 
procure a job on a guaranteed basis. 
This article is an elaboration of the concept of equality guaranteed under 
article 14. Though there is no definition, what constitutes untouchability, in the 
Constitution and as well as in the Protection of 
Civil Rights Act of 1955 the word 'Untouchable' 
signifies any kind of discriminatory practices that 
are adopted by a section of people to any of 
disadvantaged sections of people in society. This 
th
article is similar to the 13  amendment of the 
Constitution of America, which abolished 
Slavery, and in tune with the spirit of International 
law of Human Rights.
According to this article, no citizen of the country is permitted to receive any 
title from any foreign country. However, there is no bar on the Government of India to 
confer various titles and honors to its citizens based on their performances in various 
fields including defense services. At the same time none of the employs of government 
while in service, are entitled to receive any kind of emolument or any kind of job from 
or under any foreign state without the prior sanction of the President of India.
According to Supreme Court of India, the rights that are guaranteed under 
Article 19 as Natural Rights, since they are inherent with the human personality and to 
describe the free will and character of a citizen in a democratic polity. (State of West 
Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose (AIR 1954 SC 92). 
This Article confers on all the citizens; (a) Freedom of 
Speech and Expression; (b) Assemble peacefully 
without arms; (c) move freely throughout territory of 
India; (d) to reside and settle in any part of the territory 
and (d) to practice any profession or to carry any 
occupation, trade or business. In the original 
Constitution, right to property was also part of this 
Abolition of Untouchability under Article 17:
Abolition of Titles under Article 18: 
Right to various Freedoms under Article 19 :

Human Rights in Indian Context
20
th
right. However, the 44  amendment of the constitution in 1978 has converted it into a 
legal right than a fundamental right under Article 300 A. 
The difference between the fundamental right and legal right is that a 
fundamental right cannot be taken away by the state under the garb of law. A legal right 
can be taken away by the state under the authority of law by paying appropriate 
compensation for such deprivation. However, the judiciary is empowered to examine 
whether such deprivation is legal or not.
In the exercise of above freedoms, the citizens have onerous responsibility not 
to impair the freedom of others, and the government is empowered to impose 
reasonable restrictions if it deems necessary in the interest of other right holders or for 
the security of the nation.
Articles 20 to 24 constitute as right to freedom of person. The provisions 
under these various articles constitute as the basic rights in order to receive the
equal treatment and equal protection of laws under Article 14 of the Constitution. The 
rights of Freedom of person are available to all persons and not confined to cover alone 
the rights of citizens of India. The above articles will be examined in subtle 
perspective.
According to Article 20, no person is 
punishable by state without following the 
procedure laid down by law. The protection 
under this article is applicable to all persons, 
which means, both natural and legal persons. 
The protection available to persons under this 
article is related to matters of criminal law. 
Under this article, no person can be punishable 
until and unless the acts of such persons 
constitutes as a crime under various laws of the land. This article guarantees that, a 
court cannot try or punish any person twice for a same offence. In the language of law 
it is referred to as 'Double Jeopardy'. It further guarantees that no accused person shall 
be compelled to be a witness in his own case.
Right to Freedom of person
a) Freedom of Protection in respect of conviction of offences under 
     Article 20

21
b) Protection of Life and Personal Liberty under Article 21
c) Protection against Arrest and Detention under Article 22 
This article is the cornerstone amongst all the fundamental rights. This Article 
not only extends protection from the unauthorized legal acts of the state, but at the 
same time extends to cover a wide variety of rights that are necessary for a natural 
person to lead a life with minimum amount of decency 
and decorum. This article guarantees a natural person a 
number of rights that are guaranteed under the various 
provisions of fundamental rights and directive 
principles which need to be honoured and respected by 
the state in order to ensure to lead a life with dignity.
th
The 44  amendment of the Constitution and the 
innumerable number of judgments of the Supreme 
Court,  the Parliament of India made it impossible for the state to take away this right, 
and a number of  corresponding rights, that are guaranteed under various provisions of 
th
the constitution, even in an internal or external emergency through 44 Amendment in 
1978. 
Interpreting the provisions of this article in tune with the spirit of the preamble 
of the constitution, the philosophy of international law of Human Rights, the Judiciary 
has brought in a number of rights under the purview of Article 21. The decisions of the 
judiciary in a catena of cases led the state to implement policies and to enact laws 
guarantying the various fundamental rights such as Right to Health, Right to Shelter, 
Right to Pollution free atmosphere, Right to Livelihood, Right to Privacy, Right to 
Education, Right to Information, et al., and sweeping reforms in the area of criminal 
jurisprudence.
 After the decision of the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh (1993 SCC 1 645) guarantying Right to Education as a Fundamental Right, it 
took a long time for the Parliament to insert it in the Constitution under Article 21. It 
added a new clause (A) to Article 21 through the 86th amendment Act in 2002. 
Accordingly, it is an obligation of the state as per Article 21A to provide free and 
compulsory education to all the children of the country without any discrimination 
between the age group of 6-14 basing on its financial capacity.
This is an important right to have protection of the citizens from the inimical 
acts of the state. It empowers a person to know the grounds of arrest, in case if Police 
Human Rights in Indian Context

22
wants to arrest a person on any criminal charge. It further empowers to consult and 
defend the innocence of a person through an advocate, and have the right to be 
produced before the Magistrate Court within 24 hours from the time of arrest. 
However, in the case of alien enemies there is no right conferred on persons to know 
the grounds of their arrest as a preventive detention measure. In case of arrest of any 
person on charges of terrorism, a person can be detained under police custody up to a 
period of 3 months. If the custody needs to be extended, it should be
done only under the supervision of an advisory board constituted under such law or 
under the supervision of not less than a High Court. This right has to be read in 
conjunction with a number of rights in the constitution. Basing on a number of 
judgments, during the period of detention even in case of terrorism or charges of 
extortion a detainee cannot be denied the basic fundamental rights and need to be 
provided including the reasonable facilities in conjunction with right to life and liberty 
as guaranteed under Article 21. Though, the right does confer a person to defend 
himself or herself on the grounds of arrest, by police, the constitution nor the criminal 
laws of India define the term what constitutes an 'arrest' in the realm of law.
 
This important right has adopted by the 
constituent assembly basing on the jurisprudential vistas 
of international law of Human Rights. According to this 
right, no person can be compelled to engage in any work 
that degrades the dignity and constitutes as a 
contravention to life and liberty of an individual. For 
example, works like forced labour, manual scavenging, 
prostitution, trafficking etc. It also guarantees the children 
not to be employed in work below the age of fourteen, 
which deprives the tender age of childhood. A number of 
conventions, covenants, national legislations, policies of 
the government and judgments of the judiciary clearly advocated that this right need to 
be protected at all times, and a duty has been casted both on the state and on the people 
to keep a vigil and watch against the breach of this right. At the same time, the state is 
empowered to extract compulsory service for public purposes without any 
discrimination either to defend the sovereignty of nation or in times of major 
calamities.
d)  Right against Exploitation under Articles 23 and 24 :
Human Rights in Indian Context

23
Right to Freedom of Religion and Cultural, Educational Rights and 
Rights of minorities under Articles 25 to 30
Right to Constitutional Remedies under Articles 32 and 226
Being a land of many religions, in tune with the 
philosophy of the Preamble of constitution as a secular state, 
the state has no religion and all religions are equal in the eye 
of law. These articles advocate citizens to profess, practice 
and propagate the religious practices and sentiments of any 
religion without hampering the rights and sentiments of other 
religions.  People of every religion are free to establish and 
maintain any institution for religious and charitable purposes 
in accordance with the provisions of various laws of the 
country. No government institution or educational institution 
or institutions funded and managed  wholly or partially with the support of the state at 
no point of time advocate or instruct any religious activity. However, any institution 
established for the promotion and protection of rights of minorities can impart such 
education which may help them to protect their cultural perspectives is permissible 
under Articles 29 and 30 or any other law that is enacted from time to time.  
In spite of the recognition of the rights of minorities by international law of 
human rights and as well by the constitution of India; it is surprising to note that the 
term minorities is confined only to religious perspective and no definition is provided 
to define what constitutes a 'minority'.
In tune with jurisprudential perspectives of 
law that every right that has been guaranteed under 
law need to have a remedy. Accordingly, 
constitutional framers empowered the Judiciary, 
(especially the Supreme Court and High Courts) 
under Articles 32 and 226, to issue various directions 
in the form of a writ to prevent the encroachment or 
th
breach of the rights. After the 44  Amendment of the 
Constitution in 1978, and from a number of 
judgments of the judiciary, it is an undeniable fact that even in emergency the right to 
move to the court to seek remedy for the infringement of a right by the state or its 
agencies cannot be suspended as it constitutes a violation to the bedrock right of life 
and liberty of an individual under Article 21. 
Human Rights in Indian Context

24
Writ means a judicial order commanding the party to whom it is addressed to 
perform or cease to perform a specified act. Accordingly, the five writs that have been 
recognized by constitution are as follows: 
‘Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendium’ literally means to produce the body before 
a court or to answer a court.  Under this writ, if a person is wrongfully arrested and not 
produced before a court of law within the stipulated period of 24 hours, the person 
detained or a friend or a relative could move the court to seek a direction of writ of 
Habeas Corpus. If the court is convinced with the grounds stated in the application, it 
may direct authorities of police and the state to produce the person before the court. In 
case if a person is arrested on grounds of preventive detention, the court is expected to 
have an answer from the respective authorities, whether such detention is prima facie 
legal or not.
A writ of Habeas Corpus cannot be moved or granted, if a person is properly 
taken into custody under the authority of a court of law. If a court refuses a petition of 
Habeas Corpus, a person cannot file successive applications to the same court.
It literally means a command issuing from the court, directed to any person, 
corporation or inferior court or authority to an act or refrain from an act, which falls 
within its jurisdiction. The issue of writ of mandamus is only in case of parties whose 
fundamental rights are directly and substantially invaded or are in eminent danger of 
being so invaded. The party against whom the mandamus is sought and such duty must 
be of a public nature issues it only when the applicant shows that there resides in him a 
legal right to the performance of a legal duty
Prohibition is a judicial writ compelling the courts entrusted with judicial 
duties to keep within the limits of their jurisdiction. This writ is issued only at the 
beginning of the hearing of a matter by the inferior court with a view to preventing the 
court from exercising jurisdiction, which it does not possess. If the court has decided 
the matter, this writ will not lie.
This writ issued against a person who holds a public office to inquire whether 
he posses the authority or not.  The court has discretion to grant or to refuse the writ.  It 
will not be issued against constitutional functionaries. 
Habeas Corpus:  
The Mandamus: 
Prohibition: 
Quo Warranto:  
Human Rights in Indian Context

25
Certiorari: 
7.  Directive principles of the state policy
“In my judgment, the directive principles have a great value; for they lay 
down that, our ideal is economic democracy. Because we did not want merely a 
parliamentary form of government to be instituted through the various 
mechanisms provide in the Constitution, without any direction as to what our 
economic ideal, as to what our social order ought to be, we deliberately included 
the Directive Principles in our Constitution.”  - Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
The court issuing this writ acts in its supervisory jurisdiction. It is only 
concerned with the conduct of the trial before the inferior court and whether the court 
has followed the law or not. Hence, it can be said that the writ of certiorari can only be 
issued when there is error of law apparent on the face of record and not when there is 
error of fact.
The Directive Principles of State Policy are as important as Fundamental 
rights. These principles are comparable to that of the Economic, Social and Cultural 
rights of International Law of Human Rights. The Indian judiciary described these 
principles as forerunner of the UN Convention on Right to Development of United 
Nations (Air India Statutory Corporation V United Labour Union, AIR 1997 SC 
645). As they stand on par with the international Philosophy, these rights are addressed 
to the State to enact laws envisioning the economic, social, political and cultural 
Perspectives of the polity in order to enable the citizenry to enjoy their fundamental 
rights on an equal footing. In the legal sphere these principles constitute as non- 
justiciable rights, which means their derogation by state cannot be challenged in the 
courts of law.  However, in Minerva Mills Case ( 1989) 3 SCC 625, Justice Bhagwati 
held that if the non-implementation of these principles by state has any bearing on the 
free exercise of fundamental rights, judiciary can direct the state to take steps for their 
enforcement, as they create obligations to the state to enact legislation giving effect to 
these principles. But, this terminology of the court cannot be considered that their non-
adherence by state in all cases can be freely challenged in court of law like the 
fundamental rights.  These principles are enshrined in part IV, Articles 36 to 51 of the 
Indian Constitution. The Irish Constitution was the spirit behind these principles.  
Here under, a comparative table is presented for an easy understanding of directive 
principles of state policy which are equivalent to social, cultural & economic  rights at 
the international level. 
Human Rights in Indian Context

26
Constitutional 
provisions regarding 
Directive principles 
of State policy
Corresponding provision in 
the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, 1948
Corresponding provision in 
International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights, 1966
Article 39 (a) : The 
State shall, in 
particular, direct its 
policy towards 
securing— (a) that 
the citizens, men and 
women equally, have 
the right to an 
adequate means of 
livelihood
Article 25: (1) Everyone has 
the right to a standard of 
living adequate for the health 
and well-being of himself 
and of his family, including 
food, clothing, housing and 
medical care and necessary 
social services, and the right 
to security in the event of 
unemployment, sickness, 
disability, widowhood, old 
age or other lack of 
livelihood in circumstances 
beyond his control.
Article 11 1. The States 
Parties to the present 
Covenant recognize the 
right of everyone to an 
adequate standard of 
living for himself and his 
family, including adequate 
food, clothing and 
housing, and to the 
continuous improvement 
of living conditions
Article 39 : The State 
shall, in particular, 
direct its policy 
towards securing (d) 
that there is equal pay 
for equal work for 
both men and women.
Article 23 (2) Everyone, 
without any discrimination, 
has the right to equal pay for 
equal work
Article 7 
The States Parties to the 
present Covenant 
recognize the right of 
everyone to the enjoyment 
of just and favorable 
conditions of work which 
ensure, in particular (a) 
Remuneration which 
provides all workers, as a 
minimum, with:(i) Fair 
wages and equal 
remuneration for work of 
equal value without 
distinction of any kind, in 
particular women being 
guaranteed conditions of 
work not inferior to those 
enjoyed by men, with 
equal pay for equal work;
Human Rights in Indian Context

27
Article 39(f) : 
Children are given 
opportunities and 
facilities to develop 
in a healthy manner 
and in conditions of 
freedom and dignity 
and that childhood 
and youth are 
protected against 
exploitation and 
against moral and 
material 
abandonment.
Article 10 : 
The States Parties to the 
present Covenant recognize 
that : 3. Special measures of 
protection and assistance 
should be taken on behalf of 
all children and young 
persons without any 
discrimination for reasons 
of parentage or other 
conditions. Children and 
young persons should be 
protected from economic 
and social exploitation. 
Their employment in work 
harmful to their morals or 
health or dangerous to life 
or likely to hamper their 
normal development should 
be punishable by law. States 
should also set age limits 
below which the paid 
employment of child labour 
should be prohibited and 
punishable by law.
Art. 41. The State 
shall, within the 
limits of its 
economic capacity 
and development, 
make effective 
provision for 
securing the right to 
work, to education 
and to public 
assistance in cases of 
unemployment, old 
age, sickness and 
disablement, and in 
other cases of 
undeserved want.
Article 23 : Everyone has 
the right to work, to free 
choice of employment, to 
just and favorable conditions 
of work and to protection 
against unemployment.
Article 6 : 1. The States 
Parties to the present 
Covenant recognize the 
right to work, which 
includes the right of 
everyone to the opportunity 
to gain his living by work 
which he freely chooses or 
accepts, and will take 
appropriate steps to 
safeguard this right
Human Rights in Indian Context

28
Art.42 : The State 
shall make provision 
for securing just and 
humane conditions 
of work and for 
maternity relief.
Article 7 : 
The States Parties to the 
present Covenant recognize 
the right of everyone to the 
enjoyment of just and 
favorable conditions of work 
which ensure, in particular: 
(b) Safe and healthy working 
conditions;
(d ) Rest, leisure and 
reasonable limitation of 
working hours and periodic 
holidays with pay, as well 
as remuneration for public 
holidays
Article 43 : 
The State shall 
endeavour to secure, 
by suitable 
legislation or 
economic 
organisation or in 
any other way, to all 
workers, 
agricultural, 
industrial or 
otherwise, work, a 
living wage, 
conditions of work 
ensuring a decent 
standard of life and 
full enjoyment of 
leisure and social 
and cultural 
opportunities and, in 
particular, the State 
shall endeavor to 
promote cottage 
industries on an 
individual or co 
operative basis in 
rural areas
Article 7(2) The States 
Parties to the present 
Covenant recognize the right 
of everyone to the enjoyment 
of just and favorable 
conditions of work which 
ensure, in particular: 
(i) Fair wages and equal 
remuneration for work of 
e q u a l  v a l u e  w i t h o u t  
distinction of any kind, in 
particular women being 
guaranteed conditions of 
work not inferior to those 
enjoyed by men, with equal 
pay for equal work;
(ii) A decent living for 
themselves and their families 
in accordance with the 
provisions of the present 
Covenant;
(d) Rest, leisure and 
reasonable limitation of 
working hours and periodic 
holidays with pay, as well 
as remuneration for public 
holidays
 
 
Human Rights in Indian Context

29
Art.43A: The 
State shall take 
steps, by suitable 
legislation or in 
any other way, to 
secure the 
participation of 
workers in the 
management of 
undertakings, 
establishments or 
other 
organisations 
engaged in any 
industry.
Article 8 : 
1. The States Parties to the 
present Covenant undertake to 
ensure: (a) The right of 
everyone to form trade unions 
and join the trade union of his 
choice, subject only to the 
rules of the organization 
concerned, for the promotion 
and protection of his 
economic and social interests. 
No restrictions may be placed 
on the exercise of this right 
other than those prescribed by 
law and which are necessary 
in a democratic society in the 
interests of national security 
or public order or for the 
protection of the rights and 
freedoms of others;
Art.45 : The State 
shall endeavor to 
provide, within a 
period of ten years 
from the 
commencement of 
this Constitution, 
for free and 
compulsory 
education for all 
children until they 
complete the age 
of fourteen years.
Article 26(1) : Everyone has 
the right to education. 
Education shall be free, at 
least in the elementary and 
fundamental stages. 
Article 13: 
2. The States Parties to the 
present Covenant recognize 
that, with a view to achieving 
the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be 
compulsory and available free 
to all.
Human Rights in Indian Context

30
Art. 47: The State 
shall regard the 
raising of the level 
of nutrition and 
the standard of 
living of its 
people and the 
improvement of 
public health as 
among its primary 
duties and, in 
particular, the 
State shall end-
eavour to bring 
about prohibition 
of the consump-
tion except for 
medicinal 
purposes of 
intoxicating drinks 
and of drugs which 
are injurious to 
health.
Article 25: (1) Everyone has 
the right to a standard of 
living adequate for the health 
and well-being of himself 
and of his family, including 
food, clothing, housing and 
medical care and necessary 
social services, and the right 
to security in the event of 
unemployment, sickness, 
disability, widowhood, old 
age or other lack of 
livelihood in circumstances 
beyond his control
Article 11 : 
1. The States Parties to the 
present Covenant recognize 
the right of everyone to an 
adequate standard of living for 
himself and his family, 
including adequate food, 
clothing and housing, and to 
the continuous improvement 
of living conditions.
Art.49 : It shall be 
the obligation of 
the State to protect 
every monument or 
place or object of 
artistic or historic 
interest, [declared 
by or under law 
made by Parliament] 
to be of national 
importance, from 
spoliation, 
disfigurement, 
destruction, 
removal, disposal 
or export, as the 
case may be.
Article 27 (1) : Everyone 
has the right freely to 
participate in the cultural 
life of the community, to 
enjoy the arts and to share 
in scientific advancement 
and its benefits.
Article 15 (1) : The States 
Parties to the present Covenant 
recognize the right of 
everyone:
(a) To take part in cultural life;
Human Rights in Indian Context

Human Rights in Indian Context
31
Definition of State (
 36): 
Applicability of the Principles (Article 37)
State to Secure a Social Order for the Promotion of Welfare of the People 
and to certain principles to be followed by State (Articles 38 and 39) :
Article
In this article, the state need to be defined as defined 
in Article 12 of the constitution. It is left to the judiciary to 
interpret the provisions of constitution to define a state  in 
each case if necessary in the implementation of directive 
principles of state policy.
According to the provisions of the constitution and the philosophy of 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, the principles stated 
in this part are only directives to the State. The implementation of these principles 
depends on various aspects. Further, these being non-justiciable rights, in general they 
cannot be challenged in a court of law in case if the state is not adherent to any 
directive.
Articles 38 and 39 of the Constitution advocate 
the concept of distributive justice.  Distributive justice is 
though a jurisprudential concept, in the constitutional 
and human rights perspective it is the duty of state to 
achieve the basic principles of equality amongst the 
people of the country and try to remove any inequality.  
Accordingly, the state is empowered to enact any 
specific legislation to remove inequality and provide 
such facilities that are necessary to uplift the unequals in a comprehensive manner. 
Basing on the above provisions, the Government of India and the State Governments 
enacted a number of legislations to remove inequalities and extended a number of 
concessions to many sections of the people to empower them on par with other 
developed sections of the polity. 
Article 39 directs the state to adopt policy measures to enact specific 
legislations to empower people economically in order to meet the requirements of life 
and liberty. In this regard, the state need to take special care with respect to certain 
sections of people who are disadvantaged groups and to enact legislations and adopt 
policy measures that their welfare need to be augmented without any adverse impact 

Human Rights in Indian Context
32
of economic necessity. The Union of India and the State Governments in the last six 
decades enacted a number of specific legislations to augment the rights of the people in 
general and specific legislations in particular to protect those disadvantaged sections 
of people. The principles further enforce the right to equal justice and free legal aid as a 
part of Article 21 of the constitution to ensure life and liberty.
In tune with the policy of decentralization of governance from grass-root 
levels, Article 40 directs the state to take steps to empower village panchayats with 
necessary powers to achieve self sufficient governance by the people. As per the 
provisions of this article, Panchayat raj system has been introduced in the country. In 
order to give effect to the provisions, Part IX of the Constitution, the Seventy Third 
Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1992 brought in a number of changes to empower 
the grass root level administration and also introduced reservations to Women and 
Scheduled Castes and Tribes.
According to Article 41 of the Constitution, it shall be 
duty of state within its economic capacity and development 
provide right to work, to education and to public assistance in 
certain cases. In this regard, through Eighty Sixth 
Constitutional Amendment Act in 2002, the State made it a 
fundamental right giving effect to the judgment of the Supreme 
Court in Unnikrishnan V State of Andhra Pradesh delivered 
in 1992. Apart from this, the Union and States adopted a 
number of policies to provide public assistance in cases of 
unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, etc.
As per provisions of Article 42 of the constitution, it is the duty of state to 
provide human conditions of work and maternity relief.  Interpreting the provisions of 
the article, the Supreme Court in D. Bhuvan Mohan Patnaik V State of Andhra 
Pradesh ( 1975) 3 SCC 185; held that living conditions in jails for convicts and under 
trail prisoners are also need to be safeguarded by the state. The Parliament enacted a 
Maternity benefit Act in 1961 giving effect to the provisions of this article.
Organization of Village Panchayats (Article 40)
Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain Cases (Article 41)
Provisions for just and humane conditions of work and maternity relief 
(Article 42)

Human Rights in Indian Context
33
Living Wage, for Workers (
43)
Uniform Civil code for Citizens( Article 44)
Provisions for early childhood care and education to Children below the 
age of six years (Article 45)
Promotion of education and economic interests of SC/STs and other 
Weaker Sections (Article 46)
Article 
According to Article 43, the state need to take steps to ensure the workers of all 
types both in urban and rural areas to lead a life with minimum standards and to enjoy 
leisure and to able to meet the social and cultural opportunities. According to this 
article, a living wage includes food, shelter, clothing, provision for education of 
children, insurance etc.  In tune with the policy of this article, both the Union and 
States enacted a number of legislations to extend a number of facilities to workers 
working in various avocations.
Article 44 of the Constitution advocates the state to adopt a Uniform law to 
govern all personal laws on an equal footing. The same was reiterated by the 
Convention on the Elimination of the Discrimination of the Women, 1979 (CEDAW). 
Accordingly, the state initiated steps to codify the personal laws of all religions. 
However, it could not do so for a variety of reasons better known to the state. It has 
only codified the Hindu law, Parsi and Christian Marriage and Divorce laws. In some 
of these laws to remove discrimination women are given equal right to inheritance of 
property. In Shah Bano Case, ( Mohd., Ahmed Khan V ShahBano Begum (1985) 2 
SCC 556), the Supreme Court laid down norms to claim maintenance for Muslim 
women under section 125 of Criminal Procedure Code. The judiciary in a number of 
cases suggested that there should be a uniform civil code. (Sarla Mudgal V Union of 
India 1995 3 SCC 635).
Article 45 advocates that the state need to take steps to protect childhood from 
malnutrition, poverty and other communicable diseases and educate all children 
below six years. Though the state enacted a number of legislations and adopted policy 
formulations, it is still a distant dream for millions of children to have a safe and decent 
environment to live and grow. However, as stated above, the state in 2002 took steps to 
ensure right to education compulsorily to all children up to the age of 14 years.
It is the duty of the state according to Article 46 to take special care with respect 
to educational and economic interests of weaker sections of the polity, and especially, 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to protect from social injustice and all 

Human Rights in Indian Context
34
forms of exploitation. In tune with the provisions of the article, the Union and States 
adopted a number of policies and enacted suitable legislations to augment rights of 
people of  these sections.
The state has a duty according to Article 47, to take steps to evolve policy 
formulations in order to improve the nutritional level and standard of living of the 
people. It is also duty of the state to improve the public health of citizens and ban the 
consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs which are injurious to health. In a 
number of cases, the judiciary supported the move of the legislatures to ban the sale of 
intoxicating drinks and drugs. However, since liquor business is revenue generating 
activity, the state many a time is lenient to bring in complete prohibition of liquor sale.
According to Article 48, it is the duty of state to promote agriculture and 
animal husbandry by employing the modern technical and scientific means. It is also 
the duty of state to preserve breeds and prohibit the slaughter of cows and calves and 
other milch and draught cattle. In this regard, legislations passed by Union and States 
have been upheld as valid by the Judiciary in a number of cases.
According to Article 48A, an obligation 
is imposed on the state to protect the ecology and 
environment and to take steps to safeguard the 
forest and wild life of the country. In this regard, 
a number of legislations have been enacted by 
the Union and States. The Environmental 
Protection Act 1986 is one of the major 
legislations enacted by the Parliament. In spite 
of laws enacted by the state, the executive action 
is very slow in this area. It is the duty of the people of the country also to extend their 
cooperation to the State to protect the environment and forests and wild life. In spite of 
the mandate, the easygoing approach of the state led to number of disasters in the last 
sixty years which severely affected the human rights of people. 
Duty of State to raise the level of nutrition and the Standard of living and 
to improve public health (Article 47)
Prohibition of Slaughter of Cows and Calves (Article 48)
Protection and Improvement of environment and safeguarding of 
forests and wild life (Article 48 A)

Human Rights in Indian Context
35
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national Importance 
(Article 49)
Appointment of Judges in Higher Judiciary (Article 50)
Promotion of International Peace and Security (Article 51)
As per article 49, the state has a duty to 
take steps to protect every monument or place or 
object of artistic or historic interest. In this 
regard, such monuments and objects  need to be 
declared by the state as property of the nation 
and protect them from spoliation, disfigurement, 
destruction, removal, disposal or export. The 
Parliament in 1951 enacted the Ancient and 
Historical Monuments and Archeological Sites and Remains Act 1951 and declared 
many of such sites as national importance and property.
One of the important features of any democracy is an independent judiciary. It 
is only an independent judiciary without the interference of Legislature and Executive 
alone could protect and promote the human rights of the citizens guaranteed under the 
constitution. The constitutional framers taking into consideration of this important 
feature of a democratic constitution, and rallying behind the Indian national Congress 
demand for a separation in 1886. Apart from other provisions of the constitution, 
through Article 50 direct the state to separate the judiciary from the executive. 
However, at the lower level of judiciary, the District Magistrate was combined with 
the powers of Executive and Judiciary. The Government through the Criminal 
Procedure Code 1973 achieved complete independence of the Judiciary by 
transferring the judicial powers of the district administration to judiciary. However, 
financial independence to judiciary is still an important aspect which needs to be 
achieved. The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution also 
strongly advocates such independence will enhance the full autonomy of judiciary 
from its dependence on the executive for its financial needs.
India being a member of 'comity of nations' according to Article 51 of the 
Constitution, it shall be duty of the state to poster respect for international relations and 
as well as to honour the principles of international law and treaty obligations. It has to 
take steps to settle its disputes with other countries in a peaceful manner by resorting to 

Human Rights in Indian Context
36
arbitration.  However, according to article 253 of the 
Constitution, treaties entered by India will not be 
operative automatically, until and unless the 
Parliament of India passes a law giving effect to such 
treaty or agreement. However, over the years, the 
judiciary has been interpreting the provisions of 
treaties relating to human rights. It held that the 
treaties of human rights can be implemented and 
interpreted for upholding the rights of citizens even in the absence of legislation, if 
such treaty or agreement is not inconsistent with the law of the land in force. (Visakha 
V State of Rajasthan 1997 6 SCC 241). 
The brief discussion in the preceding pages on fundamental rights and 
directive principles amply makes it clear that the Constitution has a balancing 
approach to nurture the ideals of democracy and social philosophy in promoting 
human rights of the citizens. As rightly observed by Justice Hedge, in a strict legal 
perspective the fundamental rights themselves constitutes as negative in character 
imposing duties on the state not to do certain wrongs which will lead to breach of 
human rights. The Directive Principles of State Policy are positive in character as they 
mandate the state to take steps to promote the advancement of the people and the 
society in various aspects. This being the reason, the original constitution did not 
explicitly mention the aspect of fundamental duties.
From ancient to modern times, the philosophical and legal approach of India 
was based on the concept of duty. The same was advocated even in the jurisprudential 
vistas of international law of human rights through article 29 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights which advocates that the rights enshrined therein cannot 
be realised without fulfilling the duties. Since the concept of right is coupled with duty, 
the framers of the constitution of India did not specifically advocate duties in the 
constitution. However, the Supreme court of India, in Chandra Bhavan Boarding & 
Lodging V. State of Mysore in 1969 (AIR 1970 SC 2042) advocated the concept of 
duties as part of the constitution.  
The Forty Second Amendment Act to the constitution in 1976 inserted a new 
Article 51-A advocating fundamental duties which need to be discharged by citizens 
8.  Fundamental duties(Article 51A)

Human Rights in Indian Context
37
of India. However, it is silent as to their enforceability in a court of law or punishment 
for their breach. Accordingly, the Supreme Court in AIIMS Student's Union V AIIMS 
(2002) 1 SCC 428, held that they are not enforceable through a writ for their breach on 
par with that of fundamental rights. The duties enlisted in Article 51 –A are as follows:  
From this provision it is clear that all citizens have a duty to foster respect and 
abide by the constitution. As per the provisions of Emblems and Names (Prevention of 
Improper Use) Act 1950 and Prevention of Insult to National Honour Act 1971, until 
1995, private individuals were prohibited to hoist the National Flag. However, in 
Naveen Jindal V. Union of India (60, 1995, DLT516), the Delhi High Court held that 
every citizen has a fundamental right to hoist the National Flag even in private 
premises without insulting it. In Bijoe Emmanuel and others V State of Kerala and 
others, (AIR 1978 SC 748) the Supreme Court held that when national anthem was 
sung, anybody stands silently without joining the chorus in singing the National 
Anthem does not constitute violation of disrespect to national anthem.
By this provision, the values, morals that the 
various social movements advocated to fight against 
a number of evils need to be practiced in order to 
eliminate the bad practices and bring in social 
harmony as per the philosophy of the constitution.
According to this provision every citizen of the country wherever they reside 
they need to follow the principles of law and extend their full support to uphold the 
sovereignty and integrity of India. From this provision all citizens have a duty to 
refrain from any type of statements , comments against the nation draw the national 
map in a mutilated fashion. In plain language, no adverse comments or propaganda 
against the country and its political borders is permitted.
(a)  To abide by the constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, 
the National Flag and the National Anthem.
(b) To cherish and follow the noble ideals 
which inspired our national struggle for 
freedom : 
(c)   To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India

Human Rights in Indian Context
38
 (d)  To defend the country and render national service when called upon 
to do so   
(e)  To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst 
all the people of India transcending religious, 
linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; 
to renounce practice derogatory to the dignity 
of women. 
(f) To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture
(g) To protect and improve the natural 
environment including forests, lakes, rivers 
and wild life, and to have compassion for 
living creatures.
     
According to this provision, the state has a right to seek the assistance of 
people to defend its sovereignty either in times of war or national calamities. If such 
call is given, the citizens have duty to render their assistance to the state that is required 
as well within the legal parlance to undertake such work.
According to this provision, India being a 
secular country it is the duty of every one of us to follow 
the ideal of common brotherhood and not to make 
speeches or any act that effect the life and liberty of any 
one or any a section of people. This provision need to be 
read with a number of other provisions especially the fundamental rights. It is the duty 
of state also to take steps to prevent such activities and also encourage people to live in 
harmony. It is the duty of every one of us to prevent all acts that affect the decency and 
decorum of women.
From this provision, it is the duty of every one of us to protect the cultural 
institutions and any monuments, or any other property of India that constitutes as a 
part of cultural heritage.
It is the duty of everyone to protect the 
environment and protection to  all other living 
creatures.  It constitutes as a part of group rights or 
third general rights of international law of human rights philosophy.

Human Rights in Indian Context
39
(h) To develop the Scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry 
and reform
(I)  To safeguard public property and to abjure violence 
(j)  To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective 
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour 
and achievement.  
(k) Duty of a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to 
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen 
years.
According to this provision, the developments in science and technology need 
to employ to extend the benefits to its citizens. The use of science and technology or 
any kind of research that augments the needs of country or individuals be encouraged 
to foster human values and lead to further development. Any misuse may be prevented 
by the state through appropriate law.
According to this provision, everyone has a duty to protect any property of 
state and not to take part in any activity that leads to disrupt peace and security in any 
manner in consistent with the harmonious living of the people. According to this 
provision, in protest, hartals, bandhs and strikes resorting to destroy property of state, 
pelting stones on public vehicles is prohibited.
It is the duty of every one of us to work in cooperation and help each other at all 
times. This provision again highlights that spirit of common brotherhood and its 
significance to  achieve the prosperity of individuals and nation.
This provision was inserted by the 
Constitution (Eighty Sixth Amendment) Act 
2002. This was inserted when the State made it 
compulsory to educate every child in the 
country. To achieve the universal education it is 
the duty of state to educate every one and to 
provide the necessary facilities to educate every 
child. At the same time, duty is casted on the 
parents or guardians to send their children to school.
A close examination of the provisions of duties amply makes it clear they impose 
duties not only on individuals but also on the state. After the introduction of the 

Human Rights in Indian Context
40
provisions, the responsibility of judiciary has increased. The judiciary in a number of 
cases while reading the provisions of fundamental rights, also read the  directive 
principles and fundamental duties in order to ensure that the philosophy and scheme of 
the constitution is to render justice to the maximum extent to protect the rights of 
citizens.   
The scheme of division of Fundamental rights, Directive Principles of State 
Policy and Fundamental Duties by constitution, it is in tune with the philosophical and 
ideological perspectives of international law of human rights.
The above subtle discussion amply makes clear that India is the first country to 
adopt the principles of UDHR through its constitution. India is far ahead to bifurcate 
the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights even before the UN did it in 
1966 by adopting two independent covenants. The constitution equally places the 
responsibility on the state and its agencies and individuals in the promotion and 
nd
realization of human rights. The incorporation of duties through 42  Constitutional 
Amendment fully in tune with the philosophy of human rights that without 
discharging the duties that are legally cast on every one, the guaranteed rights cannot 
be realized. Hence, it is our responsibility to discharge the duties cast on every one of 
us before clamoring for the rights.
9.  Sum Up

Human Rights in Indian Context
41
MODEL  QUESTIONS 
1.
On which principles Mahatma Gandhi laid for foundation of Sarvodaya 
Movement? 
2.
The Constitution is described as …………. by Prof. K.C. Wheare, an American 
Constitutional expert.
3.
The words …………. inserted to preamble by Forty-second amendment to the 
Constitution in the year 1976.
th
4.
The 44  amendment of the Constitution in …….  has converted right to property 
into a legal right than a fundamental right under Article 300 A
5.
…………….. literally means to produce the body before a court or to answer a court.
A. Truth
B. Non-violence
(D)
C. Love
D. All of the above
A. Federal
(C)
B. Unitary
C. Quasi Federal
D. None of the above
A. Justice and Equality
B. Socialist and Secular
(B)
C. Liberty and Equality
D. Fraternity and Belief
A. 1978
B. 1988
C. 1977
(A)
D. 1987
A. Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendium
B. Mandamus
 (A)
C. Certiorari
D. Prohibition
q
q

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
42
UNIT  II
UNIT  II
HUMAN RIGHTS : ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM
This unit will introduce the ways and means how to achieve the guaranteed rights 
in the constitution. It will also introduce the remedial mechanism available for the breach 
of the respective rights guaranteed by constitution and legislature in a subtle perspective. 
It also describe the context in which the various authorities and the judiciary in India 
function in augmenting the rights guaranteed to people under Constitution, national, 
international laws and policies.
1. Brief Overview of Human Rights Issues in India
From ancient to modern times, the 
philosophical perspective of India emphasized 
on the implementation and realization of 
human rights through duties. All the texts of 
ancient and medieval times, the Constitution of 
India, a number of legislative enactments 
extensively discussed the significance and 
promotion of human rights. However, due to 
vastness of the country, high population, 
poverty, the impact of divisiveness introduced 
by the British Government between various 
communities, illiteracy, malnutrition, and many other issues have had their own 
impact on the realization of rights guaranteed by the constitution by millions of 
citizenry of the Polity. Being a party to the United Nations, a number of documents on 
human rights, promised to fulfill the ideals of international law through Constitutional 
means, the government of India in the year 1993, enacted the Human Rights Act. The 
enactment of the Act fulfilled to affirm the rights of citizens and constituted a National 
Human Rights Commission to discharge its commitment as a party to the principles of 
Paris 1991, on the constitution of structure, powers and functioning of National 
Human Rights Commissions. The clarion call of 1993 World Conference on Human 
Rights, also had a great impact on the Government of India to enact the National 
Human Rights Act in 1993 and there by establishing a National Commission on 
Human Rights. Apart from the above, taking into consideration of diverse cultures and 
due to adverse effect of socio, economic, political  conditions, in order to protect a 
number of disadvantaged and vulnerable sections of society, it has constituted a 
number of special commissions over the years for the better augmentation of rights 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
43
guaranteed under the constitution. Apart from the above statutory bodies, the Judiciary 
has been empowered to oversee the implementation of provisions of the Constitution 
to make the state to discharge its international obligations in augmenting human rights 
of its citizenry as a party to the Charter of the UN and other international legal 
documents. 
India being a party to a number of international legal documents on human 
rights and to give effect to Art 51(c) of the Constitution of India, it enacted the 'Human 
Rights Act in 1993' to extend a speedy protection mechanism for the promotion and 
protection of human rights. The objective of the Act is to establish a Commission of 
Human Rights both at the level of Union and States. It also proposes to establish 
Human Rights Courts at the District level in order to address the issue of human rights 
that need to be redressed at a quick span. In 2006, the act was amended and brought in a 
number of provisions for the effective functioning of the Commission. Since the 
implementation of the Act, the Government of India and the States in the country 
established commissions of Human Rights. 
Though the Constitution of India clearly demarcated Fundamental Rights, 
Directive Principles and Fundamental duties, for the first time all this have been 
defined as Human Rights in the act in tune with the policy of international law of 
human rights. According to Section 2(d) of the Act, 'human rights means rights of an 
individual relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity guaranteed to an individual by 
constitution and by international covenants that have a binding nature on the states and 
its various organs.' Even before the Act came into existence, interpreting the numerous 
provisions of the constitution in a number of cases the judiciary through the concept of 
public interest litigation promoted the concept of human rights. 
It is a hallmark of Democracy that the judicial organs need to be independent. 
The judiciary is an important and vital organ to promote not only the principles of 
democracy and the rule of law, but also ensures that human rights are protected in the 
true spirit and philosophy with which they are advocated. In tune with this philosophy, 
the constitution has advocated for the establishment of Independent judicial organs to 
stand between the citizens and the state to prevent the excess use of power by 
executive, legislature. At the same time, as per the provisions of the Constitution, 
especially, directive principles of state policy, there is an inherent obligation on the
2.  National Human Rights Act 1993
3. Judicial Organs:
 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
44
state to take affirmative action in many areas to usher the fundamental rights. If state 
fails to discharge its obligations, the judiciary is the only natural organ which can 
compel a state to take positive action in order to make the rights effective.
Accordingly, the Constitution of India advocated the creation of a Supreme 
Court as the highest court of the judicial system. Further, considering the federal 
features of the Union of India, every state has been advocated to have a High Court as 
the highest court of each state. These being the courts advocated by Constitution, they 
are also referred to as constitutional courts. The other courts with in a state may be 
created by a statute.   
Supreme Court of India
The Supreme Court of India being the apex court of the country is located in 
New Delhi. Being the highest court of the country, its decisions are binding on all legal 
organs and people. It has 
original, appellative and 
consultative jurisdiction. Being 
a highest court, it has a number 
of inherent powers to exercise to 
uphold principles of rule of law 
and the provisions of the 
constitution.
                                                                                                       
In the original juri-
sdiction, it exercises powers 
under Article 32 of the cons-
titution to protect the rights of 
the citizens guaranteed under the constitution and under Article 131 it exercises 
jurisdiction in case if there arises a dispute between the Union and State or between 
States apart from other jurisdictions to entertain cases of civil and criminal nature. 
According to Art 32 of the constitution, it has powers to issue writs, directions or 
orders to any authority for the enforcement of fundamental rights. The right to move 
Supreme Court being a fundamental right, it cannot be suspended except as otherwise 
provided by the constitution. (Fertilizer Corporation, Kamgar Union V Union of India 1981 
1 SCC 568).
According to the provisions of Constitution, any order passed by the court 
               

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
45
under Art. 32 cannot be challenged once again before the Supreme Court. At the same 
time, as the court has inherent powers, it can reconsider its judgment to prevent any 
gross abuse of the process or correct a miscarriage of justice. However, such petition 
filed for review of the court has to establish a violation of the principles of natural 
justice or establish a judge heard a case has any interest in the case or any 
apprehensions of bias shown in delivering a judgment, the court may be requested for 
reconsideration. But, there is no binding obligation on the court after scrutiny of such 
petition to compulsorily take such petition for reconsideration, if the court is 
convinced that no miscarriage of justice was done to the parties.  
Apart from article 32, Supreme Court has jurisdiction under various 
provisions of the constitution to entertain cases for the settlement of disputes. But the 
significance of Article 32 is that any person may move the court directly to seek a writ 
for the enforcement of their fundamental rights, if there is a grave breach to rights. 
The court over the years expanded the jurisdiction of people to approach the 
court in the interest of public, if there is a grave breach of the rights of others in the 
country though the rights of an individual are not affected. In other words, normally 
only the person whose rights are violated alone could move the Supreme Court for a 
remedy for the breach. However, considering a number of factors, the inaction of the 
state, the judiciary introduced the concept of “Public Interest Litigation” or in the 
words of Prof. Upendra Baxi “Social Action Litigation” in the early eighties to protect 
the proper enjoyment of rights of weaker sections, poor, destitute and underprivileged.
According to this concept, the concept of locus standi has been enlarged. In 
general according to the concept of locus standi only the person whose rights are 
violated alone vests the power to move the court for a remedy in the event of breach of 
a guaranteed right. In the case of Public interest litigation, any person may move the 
court for a judicial remedy wherever a legal injury is caused to any person or group of 
persons by violation of any constitutional or legal rights guaranteed by law. (S.P. Gupta 
V Union of India AIR 1982 SC 149). However, the person moves the court need to prove 
that the act is bona fide one and moved only in the interest of protecting the rights of the 
affected people.      
The concept of public interest litigation invented in India is far ahead than that 
of the Supreme Court of America which introduced the concept in the judicial arena in 
the early fifties (Brown V Board of Education 347 US 483 1954). After enlarging the scope 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
46
and pace of Public Interest litigation, the court also expanded the jurisdiction of writs. 
In the case of Public Interest litigation, a letter addressed by a person to the Supreme 
Court is considered as a writ petition, in case the court prima facie satisfies that the 
letter contains substantial legal aspects which need to be examined. Further, the court 
in exercise of its inherent powers (suo motto) on its own issue writs or directions to 
various authorities basing on reports of media, taking into consideration of the plight 
of millions of people whose rights are not fully augmented by the state. The whole 
credit of expanding the jurisdiction of the judiciary mainly owes to Justice P.N. 
Bhagwati the former Chief Justice of India.   
The system of Courts at the level of State's is not a new concept to India. Even 
before the Constitution of India came into existence, three High Courts in Bombay, 
Calcutta and Madras were established in 1862. The powers and functions of theirs 
were defined by legislation from time to time. The constituent assembly considering 
the significance of High Courts provided for establishment of more High Courts in 
various states. Accordingly, Articles 214 to 235 of the constitution deals with various 
aspects of the High Courts. According to the provisions of the constitution, 
normally there will be a high court for each state. However, the Parliament 
of India by law has the power to extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to more
than one State. Accordingly, there are twenty-one High Courts are functioning in 
the country.   
The High Courts are the highest judicial authority of a State. They have 
judicial and administrative powers. Accordingly, the administrative province of High 
Court extends to all the lower courts and tribunals working in a state or jurisdiction 
conferred by law. A decision given by High Court may be challenged before the 
Supreme Court of India according to the provisions prescribed for such appeal. On the 
lines of the Supreme Court, the High Court's being constitutional courts have a 
number of powers to protect the rights of citizens. According to Article 226, the High 
Courts are empowered to issue writs of various kinds to protect the rights of affected 
people. However, the provisions of Article 226 have been amended a number of times 
to bring in clarity to the exercise of the powers basing on the judgments of the Supreme 
Court of India. 
After the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Lt. Col. Khajoor Singh V 
High Courts

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
47
Union of India ( AIR 1961 SC 532), the High Court  normally has no jurisdiction to 
issue a writ against the Union of India, except the Circuit Bench of Punjab High Court 
in Delhi or Supreme Court. However, this has no bar on a High Court to issue a writ to 
Government of India, in case if the subject matter of a case falls within the Jurisdiction 
of the High Court. In general, the High Courts will not entertain a petition for issuance 
of writ, if an alternative judicial remedy is available for a person to seek 
judicial redress. However, the Supreme Court (A. V Venkateswaran V R.S. Wadhwani 
(AIR 1961 SC 1506) held that this rule no way bars the jurisdiction of a High Court to 
issue writs in order to protect or augment the fundamental rights and direct any party to 
seek the available alternative remedy. Accordingly, the powers of a High 
Court are very wide and far to issue writs in the Protection and Promotion of 
fundamental rights that are guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. At the same 
time, as per the provisions of the constitution, and judgments of the Supreme Court, 
though the High Courts are empowered to issue writs, they need to exercise due care 
and caution before issuing the writs and need to take into consideration seriousness of 
the facts of a case.
The brief examination of the powers of Supreme Court and 
High Courts, amply makes it clear the significant role played by judiciary in the 
promotion and protection of constitutional rights that are guaranteed to various organs 
and the citizens. The provisions of Article 32 and 226 confer unfettered powers on 
judiciary not only to augment the rights guaranteed under the constitution, but also to 
inject the philosophical framework of international law of human rights. 
The power conferred under these articles to judicial organs is described as judicial 
review in the realm of philosophy of law. According to Shri. M. C. Setalvad 
an eminent jurist and the First Attorney General of India who served during 1950 to 
1963, “the right to judicial review evolved in some countries after a prolonged 
struggle, has been granted to us by the constitution.” These words of a great 
jurist and the activist role of judiciary certainly disprove the arguments and 
counter arguments that are advanced by a section of researchers, statesmen and 
non-governmental organizations both nationally and internationally, the track 
record of India and mechanism to remedy the grievances of human rights is 
poor or negligible. 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
48
4.  National Human Rights Commission : 
The Government of India 
established the National Human Rights 
Commission in 1993 in order to give 
effect to the National Human Rights Act 
1993. The Head quarter of the 
Commission is New Delhi. As per section 
12 of the provisions of the Act, the 
commission is  empowered to inquire 
either on its own or based on a petition 
submitted by a victim or any person on 
behalf of a victim on the violation of 
human rights. It can also participate in the 
proceedings of a court with prior permission of such court to defend or to place 
information relating to violation of such human rights that are in trial before such 
court.  For example, in the Chakma Refugees in Arunachal Pradesh basing on a 
complaint by an NGO Committee for Citizenship Rights of the Chakmas in order to 
enforce the rights of about 65,000 chakma tribal's, it moved the Supreme Court of 
India through a Public Interest litigation under Article 32 of the constitution to seek 
and to enforce the rights of them under Article 21 of the constitution, (NHRC V State of 
Arunachal Pradesh and another, 1996 SCC (1) 742). It can visit any institution under the 
control of  union or any state including a jail, to study the conditions and  to make 
recommendations to such authorities of its observations and render suggestions. 
It can review any laws, acts, or factors relating to terrorism and make such 
recommendations to the Government of India for review or amend such laws and 
regulations.  In exercise of powers conferred on it, it had undertaken a number of 
studies with respect to various areas relating to disadvantaged groups on its own and 
on the basis of complaints received by it.  It is one of the duties of the commission to 
examine the international legal documents on human rights and make necessary 
suggestions to the Government of India to take necessary steps for their incorporation 
in the promotion of human rights as per the provisions of Article 51(c) of the 
constitution of India. It has a duty to promote research and conduct activities such as 
seminars, conferences, workshops, for the promotion of human rights. In this regard, 
the NHRC invites applications at regular intervals and conducts a number of 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
49
workshops, seminars, workshops, conferences in various educational, public sector 
organisations and in association with Non Governmental Organizations. It publishes a 
wide variety of books, notes and other necessary information for the promotion of 
human rights.
According to Section 13 of the Act, the Commission has  been conferred the 
powers of a civil court and other relevant laws to examine, summon, issue notices  or 
inquire matters pertaining to human rights in deciding the cases. The Commission 
since its establishment in 1993, almost in the last two decades made a significant 
impact in the promotion of human rights of number of people. Some of the reports and 
recommendations submitted by it have been accepted by Government of India which 
resulted in a number of changes to various  laws and regulations.  
An examination of the provisions of the Act, especially the definition of 
human rights provided in section 2 (1) (d) makes it amply clear that the mandate is 
mostly confined to augment the civil and political rights than to that of the economic, 
social and cultural rights, since the human rights that are enforceable in courts of law. 
It is unfortunate even after two decades of adopting the Act, the Union and 
States have not taken any steps to establish the Human Rights Courts at the District 
level for a speedy and quick justice to provide remedy of violation of human rights. 
The Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission was established in 2001, in 
accordance with the provisions (Sections 21-29) of the Union Act which authorizes 
each state to establish a commission. The Head quarter of the Commission is Mumbai. 
The State Human Rights commission enforces the rights of the people of the State of 
Maharashtra on the lines of the National Human Rights Commission. However, its 
jurisdiction is limited only to the State of Maharashtra. The State Commission has 
worked on various aspects and submitted a number of reports to the Government for 
consideration. It is very active in the promotion of Human Rights Education in the 
State. The workshop of it on the introduction of the Human Rights Education in 2010 
led for the evolution of a number of modules for its impartation, and led the University 
of Pune to introduce the Human Rights Programme with the blessing of the Governor 
and the Government of Maharashtra.
Both the National and State Human Rights Commissions offer internships of 
four weeks to the students to equip the students and to propagate the significance and 
5.  Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
50
knowledge of Human Rights Education. The details are regularly displaced in the 
respective websites of both the organs. 
 The United Nations apart from 
general human rights concerning man, 
over the years basing on the deliberations, 
recommendations of various organs and 
states adopted a number of international 
conventions, resolutions to augment the 
rights of a number of disadvantaged 
sections of the world. It made an appeal to 
all the states to adopt specific legislations extending concessions to such groups of 
disadvantaged sections of people to bring them on par with the developed sections of 
each state. It also reiterated that while enacting such policy measures, or enacting 
legislations, the states parties need to consider the socio, economic, political and 
cultural aspects which have a bearing on the exclusionist policies which prevent them 
to augment their rights freely and to establish such mechanism which will assist them 
in the enjoyment of human rights guaranteed both internationally and nationally 
without any kind of aberration. Further, the states parties need to extend the necessary 
concessions to such people to achieve self-sufficiency and to take part in all the 
activities of the polity in an equal manner. 
In India traditionally on grounds of gender, socio, political, economic, 
cultural, and caste lines; women, children, Minorities, Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes who are backward in many respects or termed as disadvantaged 
groups of people. In order to augment their rights, the constituent assembly under 
various provisions of the constitution extended a number of concessions to augment 
the rights of these people.  The Government of India in accordance with international 
and national obligations since independence adopted a number of policies and enacted 
special legislations extending a wide variety of concessions to enrich these people on 
par with other sections of the society. However, in view of poverty, illiteracy and other 
socio-cultural aspects, these people are discriminated on various fronts and a target 
group to deny free enjoyment of their rights.  In order to integrate these people with 
other advanced groups of the polity, to provide quick span of justice, to protect their 
6. Commissions on Women, Children, Minority and Scheduled Castes 
     and Scheduled Tribes 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
51
rights and to promote their welfare, the government of India in order to discharge its 
international and national legal commitments, established independent commissions 
to help them to achieve tenets of social justice philosophy of human rights. 
 The government of India considering the reports of various commissions of its 
own, and the UN commission on Women's recommendation established the National 
Commission for Women in 1992 in New Delhi 
basing on the mandate of the National 
Commission for Women Act, 1990. According to 
the provisions of the Act, the Commission will 
have the powers to investigate and examine all 
matters relating to women and to submit reports 
with recommendations for the effective 
implementation or safeguards to be provided as 
per the provisions of constitution and other laws in 
force in the country. It has the right to receive any 
complaint either on its own or on the notice of 
party regarding violations concerning on any matter relating to rights of women. For 
the promotion of rights of women to eliminate the discriminatory practices against 
women, it can conduct research and other educational activities in order to suggest 
measures to ensure the due representation of women in all fields. The Commission 
shall have the powers of a civil court while inquiring the matters relating to women. 
The commission since its establishment in its more than two decades existence 
submitted a number of reports and recommendations on a number of issues for the 
promotion of women's rights as guaranteed by law. The sustained effort of the 
Commission, The Protection of women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 was 
enacted. It conducts a number of workshops, seminars, conferences and other various 
activities to highlight the significance of women's participation in the enrichment of 
economic, social, cultural standing of India. It has submitted a draft note to highlight 
the significance to enact a special law to prevent dishonor killings of young couples 
based on caste and community issues and Acid attacks against women.
Though the Government of India Act has no specific provisions for the 
establishment of women’s commission at the state level, the Government of 
7.  National Commission for Women 
8.  Maharashtra State Commission for Women

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
52
Maharashtra established a State Commission under an Act of the State Legislature in 
1993 on the lines of the National Commission for Women. The commission was 
constituted in tune with the policy of the State to promote the rights of women in the 
state and to prevent atrocities, discriminatory practices and other crimes that affect on 
the dignity of women. The Commission advises women and the victims on various 
legal aspects to seek legal remedies and other remedial mechanism. It promotes 
research studies on various aspects of women and conducts seminars, conferences and 
undertakes such activities which are necessary for the promotion of the rights of 
women.
The government has established twelve special courts in the state to prevent 
crimes and various types of atrocities against women. Apart from the special courts, 
the government also constituted family courts in cities where the population is more 
than ten lakhs to address the issues relating to matrimony, property, maintenance, 
and guardianship of minors etc. Apart from constituting the commission 
and special courts, the state took a number of positive measures for the promotion of 
the rights of women, and encourages special studies and research in the area of 
women's studies.
The rights of children are abused on various 
fronts, due to ignorance, or factors such as poverty, 
leniency, socio, cultural perspectives that young 
children are not matured enough to have full 
freedom to bloom their rights.   In order to augment 
their rights, the efforts of Ms. Eglantyne Jebbs led 
the nation-states to evolve a number of policy 
formulations and the establishment of UNICEF. 
The continued and sustained efforts of UN and 
other international and non-governmental 
organisations led for the adoption of Convention on 
the Rights of Child in 1989.The Government of India in order to discharge its 
international and national legal obligations enacted the National Commission for the 
Protection of Child Rights in 2005. 
The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights was established 
9.  National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
53
in 2007. The mandate of the Commission is to review various laws, policies basing on 
its feedback from the grass roots level, and suggest the necessary mechanism to the 
government to meet the constitutional and international obligations of the State to 
adopt such policies according to the needs of each region in the country. It can inquire 
in any matter relating to the violation of rights of children, non-implementation of any 
law or policy either on its own, basing on the complaints received by the victim or 
anybody on behalf of the victim. It has the power to approach any High Court or 
Supreme Court for such remedy or order in the augmentation of the rights of children.  
The commission has the powers of a Civil Court while inquiring any matter 
concerning the violation or protection of the rights of children. Though there is a 
variance in describing the age of children between 14 to18 under various laws, 
according to this Act, a child is defined as below the age of 18 years. Hence, it is 
implied that every authority and legal provision need to consider child means below 
the age of 18 years. 
Basing on the provisions of the Act, about 18 states in the country established 
child rights commissions at the state level. The objective of the state commissions is to 
oversee the welfare of children in the state and to advise the government to take 
necessary steps to augment the rights of children in every respect in order to bloom 
their tender age with happiness. The Government of Maharashtra accordingly in 2007 
itself constituted the State level Commission on the lines of the National Commission. 
The state had adopted a policy of Children in 1974 itself. 
The Commission since its establishment submitted a number of reports to the 
government to consider various aspects in the augmentation of the rights of children 
with an emphasis on the rights of slum, neglected, destitute and street children. In 
2012, it has conducted a National level symposium to take necessary steps to protect 
the rights of children of the Asia Biggest slum 'Dharavi'. 
Apart from various activities, the Commission in conjunction with the state 
government training institute 'YASHADA' situated in Pune prepared a draft policy to 
be adopted by the government to augment the rights of children. In order to discharge 
its commitment, the government recently appointed a 64-member body headed by 
Women and Child Welfare Minister, Smt. Varsha Gaikwad to finalise the policy at the 
earliest.   
10.  Maharashtra State Commission for Protection of Child Rights: 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
54
11.  National Commission for Minorities: 
According to Francesco Capotorti, 
Special Rapporteur of the United Nations 
Sub-Commission on Prevention of 
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, 
a minority is: A group numerically inferior to 
the rest of the population of a state, in a non-
dominant position, whose members - being 
nationals of the state - possess ethnic, 
religious or linguistic characteristics 
differing from those of the rest of the 
population and show, if only implicitly, a 
sense of solidarity, directed towards 
preserving their culture, traditions, religion or language. However, there is no 
common understanding amongst the nation-states on the subjective (individuals must 
identify themselves to be part of a minority group) and objective factors (existence of a 
shared ethnicity, language, or religion), there is no definition in international law 
defining minorities. However, the Declaration on the Rights of Persons belong to 
National, Ethnic, Religious and Linguist Minorities adopted by the UN in 1992 refers 
to minorities as based on national or ethnic, cultural, religious or linguistic identity and 
impose a duty on the states to take necessary steps for the promotion of their identity 
and to protect their human rights.
There is no precise definition either in the Constitution or in any law in the 
country to define who minorities are. In general, Articles 25-30 of the Constitution are 
interpreted for the various rights of minorities. The National Commission for 
Minorities Act, 1992 left the discretion to the Union of India to notify any community 
as a Minority. Accordingly, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Zoroastrians 
(Parsis) have been notified by the Government of India as minorities. To protect the 
rights of these communities, a National Commission was established in 1992 itself to 
cater the needs of minorities. The Commission will evaluate the policies and laws that 
are in existence and recommend such measures to be adopted for the augmentation of 
rights of minorities. It can make specific recommendations for the effective 
implementation of the necessary safeguards to be adopted by the Government from 
time to time. It can undertake studies and encourage research leading to the promotion 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
55
of rights of minorities. It has the powers of a civil court to conduct inquires basing on 
the complaints received by any community on the violation of their rights. It produces 
annual reports highlighting the various activities, achievements, and 
recommendations of the commission to the government. Basing on the 
recommendations and on its own the government of India launched a number of 
welfare schemes in order to augment the rights of minorities.   
Along with the Union of India 15 states have established the commissions of 
Monitories in their respective states. The State of Maharashtra enacted a State 
Minorities Commission Act in 2004 and established the same in 2005. This 
commission on the lines of the National Commission will exercise similar powers and 
functions in the augmentation of the rights of minorities in the state of Maharashtra. 
Among the various issues that affect the growth 
and development of people in the promotion and 
realisation of human rights, caste plays a vital role in 
Indian society. The selfish interests of majority section of 
people branding themselves as upper castes brought the 
concept of untouchability and left a section of people in 
wilderness branding them as lower castes. These lower 
castes people normally described as scheduled castes and 
tribes. For generations they have been denied all the basic 
rights and prevented their participation in various activities of the polity including the 
minimal exercise of their guaranteed rights. 
Moved by their plight a number of statesmen, philanthropists, human rights 
activists fought against the upheavals and demanded equality and concessions to be 
extended constitutionally in order to enable them to exercise and realise their rights on 
par with other sections of the society.  The constituent assembly responding positively 
to bring in human dignity and to eradicate the injustices done to them for generations, 
provided a number of safeguards to promote their social, economic, educational, 
political and cultural interests of the these sections of people of the society. 
The Government of India in November 1950, in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 338 of the constitution, appointed a Commissioner of Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes. It was the duty of the Commissioner to look after all matters relating 
12.  National Commissions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
56
to the safeguards provided under the various provisions of the Constitution for the 
promotion of these communities, and report to the President of India on the working of 
safeguards.  The Commissioner's office was expanded in phases to cover various 
states and administrative units of the grass root level.
A number of Parliamentarians time and again demanded to amend the 
provisions of Article 338 in order to appoint a multi member team to work for the 
advancement of these groups instead of a single member body. Accordingly, a 
proposal was mooted to amend the constitution. However, even before the amendment 
took place through a resolution of the Home Ministry, in August 1978 the Government 
of India constituted a multi member body as the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes Commission. The commission was setup as a National advisory body to advise 
the government on various policy issues for the promotion of rights of these groups. 
This commission had submitted around thirty reports to the government on various 
issues in the promotion of the rights of these groups.
The Constitutional amendment of Article 338 (Sixty Fifth Amendment) in 
1990, the Government of India constituted the National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes as a statutory body. The commission is committed to 
implement the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955, which mainly advocates the 
abolition of untouchability and the SC and ST  (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989.  
The commission will not only guide the Union or State Government or 
Union Territory but also has the right to participate in the process of planning 
of socio-economic developmental aspects of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
It shall submit periodic reports to the President of India for onward submission to 
Parliament of India for the effective implementation of the measures for the 
augmentation of the rights of these groups.  It has right to inquire any complaint of 
violation or atrocities brought before it and possess the powers of a civil court while 
inquiring matters. 
The 89th Amendment Act to the 
Constitution in 2003, inserted clause A to 
Article 338,  advocating for the bifurcation of 
the National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes into two independent commissions, namely National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes and National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. 
Accordingly, in 2004 the Government divided the National Commission into two 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
57
independent commissions as contemplated by the constitutional amendment. Both 
commissions exercise the powers stated above independently from their birth in 2004 
and their headquarters is in New Delhi. Apart from the National Commissions, many 
states also constituted state Commissions on the lines of the National Commissions to 
work for promotion of welfare of these groups and to enable them to exercise their 
rights freely as advocated by the constitution and to fulfill the philosophy of 
international law of human rights. 
Apart from these Commissions, the Government of India pursuant to the 
directions of the Supreme Court of India in the Indra Sahney V Union of India (AIR 1993 SC 
417) popularly referred to as   Mandal Commission's case, the Government of India 
constituted the National Commission for Backward Classes in 1993 as a statutory 
body. This commission will strive to work for the welfare of the various classes of 
Backward people as notified by the Government of India and State Governments from 
time to time. The Commission will oversee the welfare and advise the Government in 
the policy-making aspects to promote the welfare of backward communities people. It 
has the power to inquire any matter reported to it and exercise the powers of a civil 
court. The headquarters of it is New Delhi. All most all the State 
Governments also constituted state level commissions on the lines of the National 
Commission. 
Human rights being a specialized area of 
international law, in the beginning there exists no 
mechanism for individuals to approach the 
international courts or commissions. It is only 
States being sovereign nations have the power to 
approach various courts, or commissions under 
International law. However, the recognition of 
human rights by the Charter of United Nations, 
adoption of Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, and a number of International 
Conventions, Covenants on various aspects of Human Rights, a mechanism for 
individuals at the international level acquired significance. Accordingly, in early 
1970s, the nation-states established international complaint mechanism to receive 
complaints from individuals under the following core treaties of human rights stated. 
13.  Survey of International Mechanism

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
58
(The names in brackets indicate the name of the complaint body under each treaty).  
Beyond the specified mechanisms, individuals have no access to other judicial, quasi-
judicial, or any high-level bodies of the UN. 
?
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
?
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
?
The Convention against Torture and other Cruel, inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment
?
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination 
?
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against 
Women 
?
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
?
The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance
?
The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons of All 
Migrant Workers and members of their Families 
?
The Convention on the Rights of the Child and its optional Protocols 
In the above core treaties, under each of them, States agreed to establish a 
committee to monitor the implementation of the treaty and to receive the complaints 
from individuals only if the state is party to such treaty and agreed to submit to the 
jurisdiction of the committee by way of ratification of the treaty or additional 
protocols. (
). In the above, the Committee 
on Migrant workers and the Committee on Child Rights are not yet established. Apart 
from the above core treaties, there are various avenues are available for complaints to 
be brought in by individuals to the bodies of the United Nations. Complaints can be 
(Human Rights 
Committee) 
(Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights)
 ( Committee on Torture)
(Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination)
 (Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against 
Women)
( Committee on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities)
 ( Committee on Enforced Disappearance)
( Committee on Migrant 
Workers)
( 
Committee on the Rights of the Child)     
The list being exhaustive it can be ascertained from the website office of the UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights or from any other UN websites
 

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
59
submitted to the Human Rights Council, it's Special Rapporteurs, working groups, the 
Commission on the Status of Women and other various bodies of the United Nations.  
There exist different procedures to complain to these bodies compared to under the 
above stated treaties, which provide individual redress through quasi-judicial 
mechanism. 
There are three ways for brining complaints before the committees of the 
above treaties for violations of human rights. 
Any individual can make a complaint against a state, which can be made by 
any individual about the violation of human rights under any of the treaty specified 
above to the respective committee subject to the following conditions:  
A State should have accepted the treaty and ratified it as per the procedure of 
the respective treaty. Even if a state has accepted any treaty, if reservation or 
conditions are specified by such state with respect to any provision, no complaint can 
be made against such provisions where in the reservations are made. 
Even if a state is a party to a treaty or protocol annexed there to, the state should 
have accepted the committee's competence to examine individual complaints. 
Third parties or any person may also make complaints to the committees on 
behalf of the alleged victim by obtaining prior consent in writing of such party. 
However, in the case of a victim who may not be accessible to the outside world (in a 
confinement) or is a victim of an enforced disappearance, there is no need of a consent 
of such victim stating the reasons for not able to procure the consent. The complaint 
need not be submitted in a prescribed format. However, the Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights has prepared a prescribed format and can be 
downloadable from its official website. The complaint need to be made in any of the 
six official languages namely, Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, or Spanish 
of the United Nations. In case if the complaint is written in any other language a 
translation need to be enclosed in any of the languages of the UN.
It is necessary to submit the entire information in a sequential order of the 
complaint with all relevant details with respect to the treaty in question on which the 
complaint is made. The complaint need to contain the details about the exhaustion of 
judicial and other remedies provided by the state. It is implied that before proceeding 
to the committee on a complaint, the victim need to exhaust all the available legal 
(a)  Individual communications:

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
60
remedies within the country. All the relevant documents, especially administrative 
and judicial decisions copies need to be attached with the complaint. In case if the 
party fails to provide such documents, the Secretariat office of UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights will contact the complainant for any information or 
to obtain additional information or may ask for resubmission of the details, if it is not 
satisfied with the documents submitted. Once the committee accepts the complaint, it 
will transmit the same to the concerned state for its reply. After the replies by the state, 
the committee will proceed with its final decision and will be transmitted to the 
complainant and to the concerned state. If a committee concludes that a violation of a 
treaty has taken place, the state will be asked to provide required information within 
180 days. The state is asked to submit its responses and steps taken for implementation 
of the recommendations made by the committee. Though a state is normally expected 
to adopt the measures stated in the final decision, if a state fails to act, no punitive 
action is contemplated against a state. The final decision of the committees is made 
public. 
Any state may complain to any of the committees against another state who is a 
party to the concerned treaty for the alleged violations of the provisions of a particular 
treaty. The procedure to be followed and adopted by the states specified in each treaty. 
However, no state has so far used the procedure.
Any committee may initiate inquiries against a state for the alleged violations 
upon the receipt of a complaint received by such committee. These inquiries will be 
conducted as stated above, only if a state has accepted the jurisdiction of such 
committee by adhering to a treaty or protocol.  In general, the inquiry procedure is 
adopted in the following perspective: 
1. The procedure may be initiated if the committee receives reliable 
information indicating that the rights contained in the Convention it 
monitors are being systematically violated by the State party. 
2. The committee invites the state party to co-operate in the examination of the 
information by submitting observations.
3. The Committee may, based on the state party's observations and other 
relevant information available to it, decide to designate one or more of its 
(b) Inter-State Complaints:
(c) Inquiries:

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
61
members to conduct an inquiry and report urgently to the committee. 
Where warranted and with the consent of the state party concerned, an 
inquiry may include a visit to its territory.
4. The findings of the member(s) are then examined by the committee and 
transmitted to the State party together with any comments and 
recommendations.
5. The state party is requested to submit  its own observations on the 
committee's findings, comments and recommendations within a specific 
time frame (usually six months) and, where invited by the Committee, to 
inform it of the measures taken in response to the inquiry.
6. The inquiry procedure is confidential and the cooperation of the state party 
shall be sought at all stages of the proceedings. 
In addition to the above general complaint mechanism, all most all the states 
under various treaties have agreed to submit annual reports to the various committees 
or any special committee constituted by the respective organs of the United Nations. 
After examination, if the committee's satisfy, they will send the comments or 
recommendations on the record of accomplishment of the implementation of human 
rights by the states parties. In case, if the committee may not satisfy, it may call for 
fresh evidences or fresh reports to be submitted by the state. Apart from the state, 
individuals and Non-Governmental Organisations also can submit independent 
reports with all evidences and conducted research on any of the aspects of the 
implementation or systematic violation of human rights treaties to which a state is a 
party. This system of seeking annual reports by states parties helps the UN and its 
various organs to take necessary steps through either recommendations or requesting 
the General Assembly to adopt additional measures for the promotion and 
implementation of human rights in various areas. 
The above brief discussion clearly indicates that pronouncing rights legally 
without remedial mechanism for their violation be of no use. Though the international 
community recognises the right of individuals to complain to various treaty bodies, 
mostly they are teeth less in the absence of ratification by states parties, and no strict 
compliance mechanism. It is the duty of states to testify their achievements need to 
evolve strategies to strengthen international mechanism on the lines of national 
mechanism, which they adopted seriously for the augmentation of human rights.
14.  Sum Up

Human Rights : Enforcement Mechanism
62
Model Questions
1.
The Supreme Court of India being the apex court of the country is located in 
2.
 According to Article ………… ,the High Courts are empowered to issue writs of 
various kinds to protect the rights of affected people.
3.
The …………….. are the Highest Judicial authority of a State.
4.
The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights was established 
in……..
5.
The State of Maharashtra enacted a State Minorities Commission Act in ……… 
and established the Commission in ………. .
 
A.
Gujarat
B.
New Delhi
(B)
C.
Maharashtra
D.
Kerala
A.
Article 226
B.
Article 32
(A)
C.
Article 143
D.
Article 126
A.
High Courts
B.
District Courts
(A)
C.
Both A and B
D.
None of the above
A.
2001
B.
2002
(C)
C.
2005
D.
2007
A.
2004 and 2005
B.
2002 and 2003
(A)
C.
2011 and 2012
D.
2000 and 2005
q
q

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
63
UNIT  III
UNIT  III
OBSTACLES TO HUMAN RIGHTS AND INDIAN POLITY
This unit will briefly introduce the various factors that hinder in the process of 
augmentation and realisation of human rights. It will focus on the various obstacles in 
the realisation of human rights by certain sections or group of people who are legally 
equal in all respects in the eye of law, but may not be able to realise the rights in both 
international and national scenario. It will also deal with the significance of the 
concept of good governance and its contribution in the promotion of human rights in 
the Indian context. 
1)  Inequalities in society and Human Rights: 
Human rights are applicable equally without 
any discrimination on any ground. However, 
inequalities present in each society deprive the equal 
enjoyment of human rights by a number of people. 
The social inequalities lead to the presence of 
unequal opportunities, rewards, social positions, 
and distribution of resources, opportunities, 
amongst the people or groups in a society. These 
inequalities bring in a division in a society between 
the people of a society as privileged and under 
privileged categories. They in turn transmit a number 
of obstacles for the realisation of legally guaranteed rights on an equal footing. The 
non-realisation of rights on equal footing by a group or section of people leads to the 
advantage of socially advanced groups of a society to enrich on the rights of 
disadvantaged groups in various ways and means in an illegal fashion or seize the 
opportunities of others. The unjust enrichment of socially advanced groups many a 
times try to exploit such socially disadvantaged groups from sociological perspective 
bring in problems chiefly in three dimensions such as; objective structural conditions, 
ideological supports and social reforms. 
Objective structural conditions will help to measure inequalities in education, 
poverty, illiteracy, health and other social conditions present in a society. Ideological 
perspectives supports to examine the differences present in laws, public policies, 
values, and cultural differences present in a society. In view of inequalities, social 
reforms lead to resistance by groups and social movements for the realisation of 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
64
human rights of those deprived classes.  In the struggle for 
realisation of rights bring in conflicting situations between 
advanced and disadvantaged groups, which will in turn lead 
to breach of rights of both sections. However, it is the socially 
disadvantaged groups suffer mostly than the advantaged 
groups. In the language of International Law of Human 
Rights, such breaches constitute as violation of human rights 
guaranteed both internationally and nationally in their 
realisation and enjoyment. It is the duty of nation-states to 
strengthen the justice system, especially that of transitional justice for the promotion 
of human rights and to address the issues that hamper the enjoyment of human rights. 
Among the various aspects that constitute as obstacles in realising human rights in the 
fullest extent few of them are discussed.
Population and human rights are 
independent issues. However, they have a close 
nexus with each other due to evolution of a 
number of sovereign states and political 
dominance across frontiers in designated 
boundaries after Second World War and 
decolonization. The demographic trends and 
population polices evolved by states from time to 
time, pose challenges to human rights enjoyment 
in an effective manner. Many of the human rights 
activities until the adoption of family planning 
policies by several countries during late sixties and early seventies, the 
interrelationship between human rights and population was not realised. 
In the beginning, impact of population was mostly concentrated on economic, 
social, and cultural rights than to civil and political rights. The population policies 
adopted by nation-states being a direct impact on reproductive rights, adequate 
standard of living, right to work,  right to health, right to social security, right to water, 
right to safe and decent environment, right to education,  right to resources, and other 
cultural perspectives etc. However, the impact of growth of population has brought in 
direct impact of on civil and political rights due to poverty, lack of bargaining capacity, 
unaware of policy perspective of a state by majority of population.
a)  Population:

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
65
Among the various human rights, the 
impact of population is direct target on choice of 
reproductive rights. To control population a 
number of countries in the world adopt forced 
family planning methods, which mostly hamper 
the rights of women or a family in general and that 
of poor and destitute in particular. In a way such 
policies leads to migration from one country to 
another in an illegal perspective which lead to 
deprivation of civil and political rights such as life 
and liberty, right to seek asylum, freedom of  speech and expression, right to privacy etc. 
The United Nations in its population report 2012 highlighting the significance of 
controlling population requested the state parties to adopt policies that will help 
people to realize the significance of family planning, especially empowering women 
to choose their reproductive rights freely and the advantages in the exercise and 
realisation of other human rights. Accordingly, it calls on all states to adopt the 
following steps in the promotion of family planning and the benefits to secure other 
human rights:
Radically increase financial support and political commitment to ensuring that 
rights-based family planning is available to all who want it, when they want it, 
and that services, supplies and information are of high quality.
Promote family planning as a right, the exercise of which enables the 
attainment of a whole range of other rights.
Integrate voluntary family planning into broader economic and social 
development because family planning enhances both.
Eliminate economic, social, logistical, and financial obstacles to voluntary 
family planning so that everyone who chooses to use it has access to it.
Reduce the number of unintended pregnancies and abortions by increasing 
availability, reliability, and quality of family planning supplies and service.
Make family planning programmes available to the full range of users, 
including adolescents, unmarried people, and all others who need it.
Include emergency contraception in the range of supplies available through 
family planning programmes.
?
?
?
?
?
?
?

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
66
?
b)  Poverty 
Engage men and boys in family planning, for their own benefit and to support 
the right of women and girls to use contraception.
India ranks second most populous country in the world with more than one 
billon. The increasing number of population is posing number of threats for the 
realisation of a number of human rights both fundamental rights and directive 
principles of state policy. It has a direct impact on the enjoyment of right to qualitative 
life, active participation in politico, socio, economic and cultural aspects of the polity. 
The increasing population has brought in unemployment, illiteracy, increasing child 
mortality rates, child labour, low wages, pollution, right to health, social security, 
environmental degradation, severe crunch on resources etc. In view of the increasing 
number of population, around 70% of its populace is not in a position to exercise their 
constitutionally guaranteed rights. 
The Government of India since independence promoting a number of policies 
spending billions of dollars for the promotion of population control methods. India 
was the first country to introduce population control methods in 1952 through the First 
Five-year Plan through the method of "clinical approach." In sixties and seventies, it 
had vigorously adopted a number of schemes including the permission of termination 
of pregnancy under medical supervision. It had adopted the family planning norm of 
one child for one family. However, being a democratic society its enforcement norm is 
not autocratic like China. The soft approach of the state led to increasing number of 
population and as per predictions; by 2030 it may even overtake China. If that 
happens, the threats to enjoyment of human rights may increase the ratio further and 
bring in deplorable conditions for its masses to enjoy even the minimal rights.  The 
government need to adopt aggressive acceptable population drive to counter the age-
old beliefs built in the society on child bearing, encourage effective people's 
participation, especially increasing the status of women, educating the masses to 
prevent increasing population rate. Only if population rate is controlled, India could 
th
increase its human development index from the well below 100  mark in the world and 
could become a robust economic power in the future globalizing world. 
In any society, poverty is linked with economic capabilities and living 
conditions. However, in the language of human rights poverty is a broad concept 
which has a number of dimensions. According to the United Nations Development 
Programme, "Poverty has many faces. It is much more than low income. It also 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
67
reflects poor health and education, deprivation in 
knowledge and communication, inability to exercise 
human and political rights and the absence of dignity, 
confidence, and self-respect." This definition connotes 
poverty may be viewed in a broad perspective where in 
human rights play a crucial role in their realisation and exercising the freedoms that 
are guaranteed by various international documents of international law of human 
rights, to lead a life with dignity. However, across the world, there exists a relatively 
narrow definition based on capability approach of Amartya Sen. According to this 
approach, poverty is one of the reasons for the realisation of certain basic rights and 
freedoms, such as freedoms to avoid hunger, disease, illiteracy, and so on. Freedom 
here is conceived in a broad sense, to encompass both positive and negative freedoms. 
Thus, a person's freedom to live a healthy life is contingent both on the requirement 
that no one obstructs the legitimate pursuit of good health – negative freedom, 
depends on society's success in creating an enabling environment in which one can 
actually achieve good health – positive freedom. This approach is mostly centers 
round the economic capability of individuals in deciding the levels of poverty. Human 
rights though not part of the definition of poverty; they help in reducing the levels of 
poverty and specify goal oriented policies that require in reducing poverty. 
The United Nations Development Fund in a number of reports amply made it 
clear that poverty need to be tackled for sustainable development of  both individuals, 
and nation-states. Accordingly, a number of strategies have been suggested for 
effective implementation at all levels. They are:
Accountability plays a vital role in eradicating the levels of poverty and 
empowering all the stake holders of rights. All partners in the process of development 
need to accept accountability at every level for their actions. This means as stated in 
Article 29 of the UDHR, duty occupies a prominent place in realising various human 
rights. All duty holders have to decide the type of accountable role that they can play in 
the realisation of rights of theirs and that of others. The legal framework of 
international and national empowers poor with human rights and casts legal obligation 
on others. Accordingly, states, international organisations and non-governmental 
organisations have an accountable role to evolve mechanism to eradicate poverty both 
at international and national level. 
Accountability: 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
68
Non-Discrimination and Equality: 
Many a times, poor people, especially economically down trodden groups are 
discriminated on various grounds and meets out unequal treatment. Human Rights 
framework mainly revolves round the twin concepts of non-discrimination and 
equality. It is the duty of all players to empower the poor with inclusive policies to 
integrate them with rest of the society. This inclusiveness could only be achieved by 
extending their equal participation and abolition of discriminatory practices. 
In any society the poor wants their voice to be heard and policy formulations 
need to be framed to meet out their requirements instead of receiving legal regulations 
from the above. To meet this requirement in any society, the participation takes place 
only through free and fair elections at regular intervals and integrate concerns of poor 
in decision-making. Right to participation is the central aspect of human rights to 
address the concerns of poor. Thus, it is the responsibility of every state to provide 
equal opportunities for poor for their able participation in the governance to address 
their concerns in the realisation of their human rights in order to lead of life with liberty 
and dignity. 
India has a third of world's poor. According to the reports of Planning 
Commission of India, the poverty rate has reduced from 37.2% in 2010 to 21.9% in 
2011-12. However, according to World Bank reports of 2013, a number of people in 
the country still leading a life well below the international standard forms of life i.e., 
leading a life with insufficient daily income. Since independence, there is a 
tremendous achievement by the government in reducing the levels of poverty from 
around 50%. The Government of India, the states every year, evolves a number of 
policy formulations to counter poverty and empower the masses to lead a life with 
dignity. Poverty deprives people many a times to realise their necessities which in turn 
hamper their active participation in various aspects of governance. The World Bank 
and other agencies suggested a number of measures to be evolved in order to address 
concerns of people living in poverty, which alienate them to enjoy the basic rights of 
shelter, food, clothing, health, education and participation. The UN Millennium 
Development Goals Report, 2013, appreciates the steps taken by Indian government 
in reducing the levels of poverty compare to 80's and 90's, and expects that India may 
achieve the target of eradication of poverty by 2015. Though the government may 
bring in eradiation of economic poverty, there is still a responsibility lies on the 
shoulders of state as stated in Article 38 of the constitution, to empower them in a 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
69
number of ways and means to be ably participate in the governance. At the same time, 
evolve inclusive policies to eradicate a number of differential treatments to melt out to 
a section of people on the basis of caste, gender and other cultural practices that still 
threaten the poor's ability to address and realise the legally guaranteed rights. Along 
with the state, the society, especially, the developed sections of the country, need to 
cooperate the state in augmenting the rights of poor through their effective 
participation in implementing policies of the state to shred the practices that are 
discriminatory in nature. 
Navi Pillay,
Caste is a social stratification found in 
South Asia. The caste-affected countries are 
Bangladesh, India, Japan, Nepal, Pakistan, 
Senegal, Sri Lanka, and Yemen, some of the 
countries in Africa and in Diaspora (a 
distribution of a people, language, or culture 
that was formerly concentrated in one place) 
of communities around the world.  According to UN Experts more than 260 million 
(26 Crores) people in the world are facing discriminatory practices basing on caste 
system. The caste-based practices have a profound impact on the systematic violation 
of human rights upon individuals, communities, societies on wide-ranging aspects. 
According to the Report of the International Consultation on Caste Based 
Discrimination (2012), the effect of caste based practice on the following aspects: 
c)  Caste:  
"Caste is the very negation of the human rights principles of equality and non-
discrimination…The plight of hundreds of millions cannot be justified as age-old 
traditions, nor can it be regarded merely as a 'family business'…The time has come to 
eradicate the shameful concept of caste. Other seemingly insurmountable walls, such 
as slavery and apartheid, have been dismantled. We can and must tear down the 
barriers of caste"-   
?
systemic violence, particularly against women 
?
extreme poverty 
?
degrading untouchability practices (e.g. denial of drinking water from upper 
caste water sources, denial of access to public and religious places) 
?
intergenerational bonded labour and child labour 
?
unemployment or dangerous/degrading employment (e.g. manual scavenging) 
 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
70
?
restrictions on employment or forced occupations (e.g. prostitution) 
?
lack of access to justice, and discrimination and violence from the police and 
justice system 
?
lack of access to, control of, and benefit from resources - prohibition of 
ownership of land and property 
?
segregation in housing, school and burial/cremation grounds 
?
de facto prohibition of inter-caste marriage 
?
abuse or discrimination against Dalit children in schools - high dropout rate 
from school due to poverty and discrimination 
?
lack of political power or genuine/independent political representation at all 
levels 
?
caste discrimination in humanitarian response to disasters or conflicts 
?
discrimination or lack of access to health care - related high maternal mortality. 
The United Nation considers such discrimination equivalent to racial 
discrimination. The Periodic review reports of UN, and special procedures of the 
Human Rights Council basing on their observations, requested member states to 
cooperate with it to include the issue of caste-based discrimination as part of the racial 
discrimination and to monitor the issue of violation of rights. However, a number of 
countries including India oppose to mix up the issue with racial discrimination and 
assures UN that at the National level they will tackle the issue on their own. 
To tackle the caste based discriminatory practices, a number of strategies 
adopted by various international bodies. They are effective civil society strategies; 
establishing specific institutions to sternly deal with such adverse practices; effective 
usage of communication and information system; adoption of inclusive policies to 
bring in such people into mainstream activities of society through governmental and 
civil society support etc. 
 In India, the practice of caste system deprives number of human rights to 
various sections of people. The discrimination based on caste had been abolished by 
the Constitution of India. The Preamble clearly advocates a democratic constitution to 
extend fundamental rights to all without any discrimination or on any social strata.  
However, the diehard practices have an impact in modern India and visible especially, 
in semi urban and rural areas. The international community considers the 
discriminatory practices based on caste within the ambit of International Convention 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
71
on Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 1965 to which India is a party. The General 
Recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
condemns the discriminatory practices based on caste and by birth. However, the 
Government of India refuses the intervention of the UN in its international affairs and 
firmly rejects the comparison of caste-based discrimination on racial basis. In the 
opinion of the government, caste is a bar legally and considered only for identifying 
the economic backwardness of various sections of people to extend concession 
guaranteed by constitution to uplift their status. The government of India since 
independence adopted a number of legislations, institutional mechanisms to wipe out 
caste based discriminatory practices. Any untoward incident on the basis of caste is 
punishable under criminal law and various other laws adopted by the government 
from time to time. 
In spite of the efforts of state, caste based practices are prevalent in India due to 
preconceived notations of various sections of people. The government apart from the 
existing various strategies that are adopted need to educate the people on a mass scale 
highlighting how such practices jeopardizes the rights of not only a section of people 
but also the progress of the nation. 
Inaccessibility to legal redressal mechanism constitutes as a basic violation of 
human rights, especially, access to justice. Inaccessibility to legal redress may occur 
due to lack of proper legislative, administrative, or judicial mechanism in a state to 
victims of human rights or civil rights. In case, where in  the legal recourse is provided 
by a state, vulnerable and disadvantaged people, due to adverse conditions of 
economic, social and cultural perspectives prevailing in any society could not be in a 
position to access the remedial mechanism provided by a state also leads to  
inaccessibility to seek legal redress. In order to prevent such abuses to victims of 
human rights violations, international law of human rights recognised right to access 
to justice as a basic human right. Before examining the aspect of inaccessibility to 
legal redress in Indian context, it is necessary to understand the concept of access to 
justice, which is a human right.
  Access to justice is a fundamental human right. Theoretically, every country 
advocates that Executive, Legislative, and Judicial wings are wide open to prevent any 
kind of illegality while tackling the violations of human rights and are have equal 
access to everyone to seek remedial mechanism. However, in practice many a times, 
d) Inaccessibility to legal redress: 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
72
they are far from reality, especially to the sufferers of human rights violations. 
According to the principles of international law of human rights, states need to take 
steps in an effective perspective to render justice to everyone concerning civil rights or 
human rights violations. To achieve effective justice, states must ensure that justice be 
provided without any kind of discrimination, and adopt a number of measures to have 
access to justice and to seek a remedial mechanism through constitutions, especially, 
to address the concerns of human rights victims. 
International Law of Human Rights ensures an effective remedy for the 
victims of human rights through a number of legal instruments. Article 8 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, prescribes the right to effective 
remedial mechanism for violations of human rights. Article 2 (3) of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 endorses the right to effective remedy 
through judicial, administrative or legislative or by any other legal mechanism that 
will have the possibility of rendering judicial remedies to the victims of human rights. 
The right to effective remedy further guaranteed by International Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1965 in Article 6, Article 2 (C) of 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 
Article 14 of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment 1984 etc. It is an established right of the victims of human 
rights or civil rights to seek an effective remedy through national tribunals and other 
mechanisms established by a state. At the same, it is an obligation of a state to punish 
the offenders and provide compensation to victims including rehabilitation in 
necessary cases.  
The constitutional framers guaranteed to all, 
justice that is socio, economic and political in all 
respects, and provided an equal opportunity to realise 
the fundamental rights without any kind of 
discrimination based on sex, caste, religious, 
economical, social, and cultural status through the 
preamble, and other provisions of the constitution. 
However, inaccessibility to justice results due to a 
number of reasons. Firstly, deviation to adhere to 
principles of constitution, legislative, executive, and judicial pronouncements at all 
times. Secondly, poverty, discriminatory socio, economic and cultural practices, 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
73
illiteracy of knowledge about the free exercise of rights by vast majority of populace of 
the polity. Thirdly, non-registration of cases by police authorities at times, where in the 
victims are poor or belongs to marginalised sections of society, or against  politically 
and socially well to do people. Fourthly, huge amount of litigation costs to approach 
courts,pendency of cases, problem of hostile witnesses etc. Fifthly, lack of 
information about language, procedures of court to users,  lenient attitude of public 
prosecutors in progression of a case, poor quality of investigative reports and delay in 
forwarding to them to court by investigating agencies etc. Finally, age-old laws, 
lengthy judicial and administrative procedures, and ineffective use of alternative 
judicial remedial mechanism are some of the chief reasons for inaccessibility of 
justice to majority of the populace in India. 
To remedy this, following positive steps would help to a great extent to 
augment to have proper access to justice. Firstly, codification and simplification of 
various laws, especially personal and service laws such as Motor vehicles Act, Post 
and Telegraphic laws, Railways Act, Labour and social welfare laws, and laws that are 
specially enacted to promote the rights of  vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. 
Secondly, assist the victims of poor and needy accused by providing free legal aid, 
encourage the resolution of disputes of long standing by employing alternative 
procedures. Thirdly, dissemination of constitutionally guaranteed rights of victim, 
Alternative Dispute Resolution methods such as negotiation, arbitration, Lok Adalats, 
Legal Aid cells working in law Departments of various Universities and law colleges, 
and district level adopting the directives of Supreme Court of India, ensure 
registration of cases by police in all circumstances, etc. Fourthly, empowering 
rd
th
Panchayats with judicial decision-making powers as advocated by 73  and 74  
constitutional amendments, establishing women's courts, human rights courts, as 
advocated by various laws of Parliament of India. Fifthly, to realise the rights freely by 
masses, especially victims of inaccessibility to justice, educate them about human 
rights and fundamental rights as guaranteed by constitution in their vernacular 
language in an easy and understandable perspective. Finally, oversee the victims 
receive adequate compensation for wrongful or negligent acts of state. 
2. Abuse of Executive Power: Corruption-Nepotism or favoritism 
 "No man of what state or condition he be, shall be put out of his lands or 
tenements nor taken, nor disinherited, nor put to death, without he be brought to 
answer by due process of law"

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
74
According to above philosophy 
advocated by King John of England in 1215 
through the famous Charter of Magna Carta, 
rule of law constitutes as a fundamental 
basis for governance. This legal dictum of 
King John became the basis for Rule of Law 
or Due Process in the modern world. Due 
process of law means, state has an obligation 
to respect the legally guaranteed rights of 
persons. Accordingly, any action 
contemplated by a state or governmental authority have an effect by the action of such 
agency of state either in person or to his or her property, has a duty to issue a notice in 
detail and provide with reasonable opportunity to legally defend the claim of such 
person whose rights would be in peril. When a state or any of its agencies initiates 
action without adopting the above procedure, it would amounts to subversion of rule 
of law or abuse of executive power.  
All the international legal documents on human rights guarantee the right to 
fair hearing in all civil and criminal proceeding before a competent, independent and 
impartial tribunal or court established by law. Accordingly, any action of a state 
without following the procedures of law or not providing any opportunity to defend by 
oneself, and interferes to harm the life and liberty of an individual in an authoritative 
manner to rob the rights or property referred to as abuse of executive power. 
Many a times, for one reason or the other, state and its agencies exercise their powers 
arbitrarily constitutes as violation of human rights. Abuse of executive power by state 
or any of its agencies for benefit of few individuals or for sake of authorities 
in power without legal recourse, seriously impair Civil, Political, Economic, 
Social and Cultural rights. To prevent such abuses, the UN and its various organs at 
regular intervals appeal to states to take necessary democratic steps to stop such 
abuses, which primarily defeat the purpose of the catena of legal instruments of 
international law of human rights adopted by 'comity of nations.' Corruption is one 
such issue, which leads authorities of states including its agencies to bend the norms 
and favour their kith and kin. The corrupt practices bring in unlawful gain to some and 
legal loss to many in the free exercise of guaranteed human rights both in international 
and national levels.

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
75
According to the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillai, 
"Corruption kills. The money stolen through corruption every year is enough to feed the world's 
hungry 80 times over. Nearly 870 million people go to bed hungry every night, many of them 
children."  She further said, "Corruption is an enormous obstacle to the realization of all human 
rights — civil, political, economic, social and cultural, as well as the right to development. 
Corruption violates the core human rights principles of transparency, accountability, non-
discrimination and meaningful participation in every aspect of life of the community. Conversely, 
these principles, when upheld and implemented, are the most effective means to fight 
corruption." The statement of the High Commissioner of Human Rights, clearly 
highlights the evils that are associated with corruption in realizing the human rights 
that are guaranteed to individuals.
To eradicate corruption, the UN adopted a convention in 2004 basing on many 
years of its work. The convention came into force into force in 2005 with majority of 
states becoming parties to it immediately. To help nation- states in their fight against 
corruption, the convention for the first time introduces a comprehensive set of 
standards, measures and rules that all countries can apply in order to strengthen their 
legal and regulatory regimes to fight corruption. It calls for preventive measures and 
criminalization of the most prevalent forms of corruption in both public and private 
sectors. In addition, it makes a major breakthrough by requiring member states to 
return assets obtained through corruption to the country from which they were stolen.
The Constitution of India guaranteed human rights to its populace through 
fundamental rights, which are regarded as key provisions to usher the rights of 
individual The Supreme Court of India in a catena of cases explained the real 
philosophy of the various rights and expanded the provisions of life and liberty by 
adding a number of rights to it. At the same time, the Constitution of India provided the 
remedial mechanism to prevent the abuse of state against the encroachment of rights 
by executive. However, due to economic, socio, cultural backwardness amongst 
various sections of the polity, many a times the abuse of executive power by a section 
of people in authority is to help the rich and to favour near and dear ones of political 
bosses, and in turn to gain either personally or economically. Such deviations and 
misuse of power is antithesis to the realisation of fundamental rights guaranteed to 
people, especially the rights of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups of the polity. 
Corruption and nepotism are one of the chief attributes of abuse of executive power in 
several instances by a section of people in various organs of state. These practices 
denies the vulnerable and disadvantaged people to have an access to basic services 
such as health, education, land, food, shelter and clothing.  

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
76
In order to counter such deviate practices a 
number of strategies need to be adopted to bring in a 
transparent administrative system. Among the various, 
the strategies developed by OECD (International 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development) to tackle the issue of abuse of power for corrupt and nepotistic practices 
in Asia and Pacific are worth considering.  According to it: 
 Integrity and 
competency in public officials is the most important aspect. This could be achieved by 
adopting fair means of selection and promotion of officials through transparent and 
fair means. Adequate remuneration and other perks, introducing code of conduct at 
regular intervals, periodic reviews to remove conflict of interests in rules, regulations 
and procedures, enacting new legislations repealing the age old laws, to oversee the 
non-interference politicians in the functioning of public officials.
 Public Management System is another 
effective tool. This could be adopted by introducing wide range of discretionary 
provisions, regular interactive sessions between public officials and public; e-
governance; rotation of officials at stipulated intervals; public accountability mechanism 
through periodic audits by independent agencies and public-spirited persons etc.
 Through this system 
the state need to fund political parties and election campaigns. It is necessary to 
introduce code of conduct for politicians, inducing their role and responsibility to 
public at large etc., imparting the comparative administrative and legislative process 
and healthy process of administration at regular intervals. 
 This aims at regular period 
review of policies of various business houses and compulsory insistence of adoption 
of ethical and moral practices. Regular audit of their role and responsibility towards 
good practices and social responsibility factors etc.   
Apart from the above, the various committees, commission appointed by the 
government from time to time, the numerous judgments of courts highlighted that 
strict punishment including dismissals in necessary cases to eradicate corrupt and 
nepotism among public officials. At the same time, adoption of simple and transparent 
procedures and delegation of powers amongst various officials instead of 
concentration of power among very few, impartation of good ethical and moral 
a. Integrity and competency in public officials:
b. Public Management System:
c. States Role in Augmenting Political System:
d. Regulation of Business Organization:
OECD
ORGANISATION
FOR ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION
AND DEVELOPMENT

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
77
practices at regular intervals; basic amenities, attractive remuneration and 
promotional channels certainly help to eradicate the corrupt and nepotistic practices in 
subverting the executive power. Apart from the above, strict action be initiated against 
political leaders who interfere in the functioning of public officials and use their power 
to deter the officials is the most essential ingredient to prevent abuse of executive 
power through corrupt and nepotistic practices which in turn augment the realisation 
of constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights by people to a maximum extent.   
 The concept of good governance is 
increasingly used in the contemporary era, due to bad 
governance by nation-states in the world. The term 
governance is not a new term. It is in existence since 
olden days. Governance generally means, involving 
various players or agencies in the decision making 
process on any matter concerning formal or informal 
sectors. In decision-making process, government is 
nucleus to implement various policies, laws and regulations to render effective service 
to people and to work for the progress of a nation. The term governance normally 
employed to refer a number of perspectives such as local governance, state 
governance, regional governance and international governance. 
The promotion and realisation of human rights mainly depends upon the 
model of governance adopted by each country. However, arbitrary exercise of 
executive powers conferred upon various organs of a state not only brings in bad 
governance but also have an impact upon the realisation of human rights of the 
populace of a polity in general, vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in particular. The 
bad governance, authoritarian rule, regional and international conflicts, 
decolonization, the concentration of power amongst few authorities of state, 
misdemeanors of a section of people in each society in the promotion of rights of 
socially, economically and culturally disadvantaged people's rights, deviance in 
implementing the statutes, rules and procedures in decision making process, the 
developments of science and technology especially, information technology, entry of 
multinational corporations in various fields, insistence of the promotion and 
protection of human rights by UN etc., led for the evolution of the concept of good 
governance. 
3. Human Rights and Good Governance 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
78
There is no single and exhaustive definition to good governance. There is no 
limit in its scope and concept. It is employed to define a number of aspects. However, 
the employment of the phrase and its operational part is very difficult to achieve. 
According to Office of  UN High Commissioner for Human rights basing on the 
context and the objectives sought to achieve, good governance need to encompass the 
following characteristics, such as; full respect of human rights, the rule of law, 
effective participation, multi-actor partnerships, political pluralism, transparent and 
accountable processes and institutions, an efficient and effective public sector, 
legitimacy, access to knowledge, participation of civil society in governance,  
information and education, political empowerment of people, equity, sustainability, 
and attitudes and values that foster responsibility, solidarity and tolerance. But in 
general, good governance is expected from a state to be transparent in its dealings 
include all the players of a polity and outcomes need to be oriented towards 
developmental process. 
According to the resolution 2000/64 of the 
UN Human Rights Council the chief attributes of 
good governance are transparency; responsibility; 
accountability; participation and responsiveness 
to the needs of the people.  According to United 
Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Asia and Pacific (UNESCAP) good governance 
has eight chief attributes. 
Participation of people at various levels of a state including in 
governance is the key element for realisation of good governance. The government 
needs to have a proper communication channel where in it could receive the feedback 
of the expectation of people in governance. It may be either through representative 
manner or through any other means. The main aspect is the guarantee of human rights. 
 Rule of law means, fair implementation of legal rules and 
procedures with a remedial mechanism without any partiality. It also ensures the full 
protection of human rights. 
The institutions of state need to efficient to meet 
the requirements of people and produce results that need to meet the expectations of 
people. It also implies the efficient use of resources in a sustainable perspective. 
Participation: 
Rule of Law: 
Effective and Efficiency: 

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
79
Equitable and Inclusive: 
Responsiveness:
Transparency:
Accountability: 
Consensus oriented: 
The well-being of a society depends upon the 
equitable status of all its populace. In order to have such an equitable status, the 
socially, economically and other disadvantaged groups of people need to be provided 
with opportunities to take part in the activities of society in an equal manner. 
 All the institutions need to serve with a time frame with 
maximum result orientation. 
 The decisions taken and their enforcement need to be 
according to the legal rules and regulations. It also includes people need to have an 
information free society, with a responsive free media and to have an access in 
decision-making process.
Accountability is a holistic concept where in all the 
stakeholders which means, the public, private and civil society orgnisations all of 
them together accountable to the society for their acts.  The quantum of accountability 
depends upon the nature of activities of each organ. To achieve accountability, one of 
the basic features of it is, rule of law need to be adhered without any deviance. 
In every society, there are a number of actors. All of 
them need to evolve good strategies with consensus to achieve them keeping the 
community interests at par. At the same time, a long-term objective perspective is 
needed for sustainable human development and how to achieve the goals of such 
development need to be planned in a strategic perspective to counter the problems 
with a progressive approach.
Human Rights and good governance have a number of links as they are 
mutually reinforcing each other.  Both of them together indicate a number of 
standards, which performers need to adopt. They jointly promote mainly 
strengthening of institutions, democratic participation, observance of rule of law, 
effective service delivery mechanisms, inculcate anti corruption and non-nepotistic 
practices in governance. The UDHR through article 21 and 28 advocates 
the concept of good governance at all levels including the international 
participation. The Covenants on Civil and Political Rights, Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights and a number of documents advocate for the promotion of human 
rights, which help to promote the concept of good governance. The Millennium 
Development Goals also endorse the concept of good governance, which is the key to 
realise human rights.

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
80
The Constitution of India advocates the view of the UN in the promotion of 
human rights and good governance.  The government after independence introduced a 
number of schemes, other plans to eradicate poverty and to bring in the disadvantaged 
sections of people into mainstream activities of society. However, illiteracy, poverty, 
unemployment, corrupt and nepotistic practices of a section of people, criminalization 
of politics, and a number of other instances  have left a blot on the governance of the 
country. Though the government introduced right to information, right to education 
and other policies to bring in inclusive growth of the disadvantaged sections, a number 
of initiatives are required to meet the expectations of people and that of international 
community. It is the duty of state to include civil society in decision-making process, 
introduction of specific programmes with time frame to reduce poverty and 
malnutrition in children, develop the status of women, especially the economic 
scenario. Funding of election expenditure, encouragement of alternative dispute 
settlement, evolve strategies to reduce pendency of litigation in judiciary, 
establishment of human rights courts as contemplated in the Human Rights Act, 
reduction of governmental expenditure, steps to promotion of fundamental rights to 
their realisation in an effective perspective, compulsory education of human rights, 
more transparent methods of governance etc. These steps will definitely increase the 
potential of India as a vibrant democracy.
4.  Sum Up:
The constitution and the state have guaranteed human rights. However, the 
inequalities in society present a bleak picture for their augmentation. The number of 
problems that are plugging the polity in general, and lack of empowerment of 
individual in particular leads to abuse of executive power by vested interests. In order 
to drive away the maladies, people need to seriously discharge their duties without any 
type of fear or favoritism. These will certainly lead to establish good practices in 
governance to evolve effective solutions for the problems of past, present and future.

Obstacles to Human Rights and Indian Polity
81
MODEL  QUESTIONS
1. The United Nations in its population report………..highlighting the 
significance of controlling population
2. OECD means ……………………….
3. According to United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia 
and Pacific (UNESCAP) good governance has ………… chief attributes.
4. The UDHR through ………….. advocates the concept of good governance 
at all levels including the international participation.
5. Rule of law means,……..  implementation of legal rules and procedures 
with a remedial mechanism without any partiality.
 
A.
article 21 and 28
B.
article 12 and 18
(A)
C.
article 13 and 28
D.
article 16 and 28
A.
2012
B.
2011
(A)
C.
2010
D.
1988
A. Organisation for Ecological Corporation and Development
B. 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(A)
C. 
Organisation for Educational Cooperation and Development
D. None of the Above
A.
7
B.
6
C.
5
(D)
D.
8
A.
Fair
B.
Unfair
(A)
C.
Bias
D.
None of the above

Role of Advocacy Groups
82
UNIT  IV
CHAPTER  IV 
ROLE OF ADVOCACY GROUPS
The politico-legal process for the adoption of Human Rights is universal. The aim of 
all legal instruments at International, Regional, Sub-Regional, National, and Local plane is 
to activate the individuals politically to safeguard their rights guaranteed under law. The 
Economic, Social and Cultural rights impose duties and obligations on the state to strive for 
the promotion of welfare of all sections of society to realise their guaranteed civil and 
political rights in an equal fashion. However, a number of issues such as poverty, 
malnutrition, threats to peace and security, underdevelopment, asymmetrical status of 
individuals in society, etc, are the irritants in realising human rights fully, to lead a life with 
liberty and equality of status as guaranteed. To help the victims of human rights, a number 
of advocacy groups and a number of groups of people plunge into action not only to share 
the miseries, but also to fight with the agencies of state. This chapter in a shuttle 
perspective introduces to the student the significance of various advocacy groups and the 
role played by them in realising the dreams of victims of human rights violations.  
1.  Introduction:
The realisation of human rights mostly depends upon promotional activities 
initiated by nation-states at every level, especially, on the articulation, think globally 
and act locally.  Any subversion in their commitment to engage in all human beings 
brings in a number of issues on to centre stage that leads to denial of guaranteed rights 
and the struggle to their restoration. In order to help people whose rights are in 
quandary, civil society and a number of advocacy groups have emerged at global and 
national levels to defend the rights of victims.  These 
advocacy groups popularly referred to as Human Rights 
Defenders.  In view of their increasing number, active 
participation individually and of groups, many a times, the 
agencies of state question both of their legitimacy, their 
character, role in the augmentation of rights and status to 
fight on behalf of others. 
 A number of such incidents and problems 
encountered by advocacy groups and individuals across the World, the United Nations 
adopted a declaration on the rights and responsibilities of individuals, groups and 
organs of society to promote and protect universally recognised Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms in 1999 in order to extend legitimacy to the advocacy groups. 

Role of Advocacy Groups
83
The resolution recognises that “everyone has the right, individually and in association 
with others, to promote and to strive for the protection and realization of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms at the national and international levels.”  The UN further 
to protect the rights of these groups or advocators created a post of Special 
Representative of the UN Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders in 2000, 
which was later replaced by the UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defenders 
in 2008.  The Special Rapporteur suggested a number of protective mechanisms to the 
defenders of human rights, which include dialogue with states to prevent intimidating 
acts against such defenders of human rights and requested nation- states to adopt 
specific mechanism to prevent such abuses etc. 
Human Rights are older than human history. As natural rights, they are part of 
nature. Every society in one form or the other has advocated them, since the evolution 
of humanity. However, they have undergone a revolutionary change with the 
Declaration of Magna Carta in 1215, followed by a number of texts. A final shape was 
given to them after the adoption of the Charter of UN and Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. In spite of long history, revolutionary change in their articulation, most 
people in the world are fully unaware of their rights. Advocacy groups play a vital role 
to prevent their abuse and to help victims of human rights to seek justice within the 
guaranteed political and legal structure at every level. 
 
Media means medium of communication. It is a broad term to represent print 
and audiovisual broadcasting, writing visually with pictures, reporting news etc. 
Accordingly, media represents newspapers, magazines, Television, Internet etc. 
Human rights are age old. However, in any country, the exact content of rights and the 
remedial mechanisms are known to only a section of populace. The rights, which 
citizens enjoy, vary depending on the economic, social, political and cultural 
developments prevailing in each society. In this context, media will play a vital role in 
the promotion, protection and realisation of human rights. Media being a powerful 
medium could give publicity to violations of human rights, publicity to organisations 
and individuals involving in the promotion of human rights education. It can educate 
people, suggest the ways and means to address the violations. 
In the contemporary era, with the help of technology media could bring 
2.  Role of Advocacy Groups:
3.  Professional Bodies: Media, Role of Lawyers-Legal Aid
a) Media:

Role of Advocacy Groups
84
experts from any nook and corner of the world on 
any issue through live discussions and render the 
ways and means to counter violations in the 
realisation of human rights. It has the ability to 
mobilise people and bring the perpetrators to justice. 
A number of people who constantly violated human 
rights including that of heads of nations around the 
world been brought to justice through the extensive 
coverage and reports of media. At the same time, 
being a fourth estate of a state, it needs to exercise 
restraint and caution. The freedom extended to press for its contributory role to 
promote values of democracy and human rights should not be misused. It needs to 
adopt a self-regulatory mechanism to present the truth to help victims of human rights 
to seek justice. It should take care of content of the report, language needs to be decent, 
employ only well qualified and trained reporters, exercise restraint in publishing 
materials, reports, photos that create tension or sensitivity among various sections of 
society.
In India media plays a vital role since olden days. However, it was limited to 
few as the medium of communication and other aspects were written on palm leaves. 
The modern medium of print communication was started during the days of British 
East India Company. James Augustus Hickey, an English man started the Bengal 
Gazettee on January 29, 1780 and also popularly known as “Calcutta Advertiser.” The 
East India Company did recognise freedom of speech and expression as a basic right. 
It took several steps to prevent the printing of Bengal Gazettee including finally 
closing it down in 1787 and sent back Hickey to England. However, the initiation of 
Hickey laid foundations for free press in India. In 1780 Indian Gazette, Calcutta 
Gazette in 1784, Bengal Journal in 1785 led other parts of the country to  start print 
medium in the country. The Madras Courier (1785), Mumbai Herald in 1789 and other 
papers started slowly gaining ground for freedom of press and communication. The 
change of Policy of strict censorship of media by Lord Hasting in 1818, led for the 
evolution of a number of newspapers in India. The First paper published in an Indian 
language is said to be in Kannada. The efforts of a German led for the publication of 
first vernacular newspaper by name Mangalura Samachara in 1843. This led for the 
evolution of vernacular newspapers in many other languages in the country. Among 

Role of Advocacy Groups
85
the oldest papers, the Amrit Bazar Patrika in Bengali is still popular paper in Bengali.  
The printing of large number of papers, and Sir Thomas Munro's reforms package, 
followed by Sir Metcalfe's efforts led the British Government to enact the first 
comprehensive Press Act in 1867, which repealed the 1835 Act. This Act named as 
Press and Books Registration Act, which is still in force with amendments made to it in 
later periods. Apart from this act, a number of acts have been enacted which laid the 
legal basis for freedom of speech and expression.
After the adoption of constitution, freedom of speech and expression 
constitutes as one of the fundamental determinant to realise the fundamental rights as 
guaranteed by constitution.  The concept of right to information is the basic right that 
encompasses all rights in their realisation. The Supreme Court of India (Bennett 
Coleman and Company of India v. Union of India) in 1986 held that though it is 
well within powers of a state to take preventive steps of misuse of freedom of speech 
and expression in public interest, any preventive measures that directly impair to 
prevent the ideas of press to publish constitutes as a serious encroachment on the 
cherished right of  free speech and expression. At the same time, it cautions press not 
to publish any false news items in Hari Jaising in 1996.
Media plays an enormous role in a number of issues in guiding the state and as 
well as public in the realisation of human rights. The significant schemes, policies of 
state, political parties, leading  judgments of courts, efforts of various institutions, 
individuals on the promotion of human rights brought by media constitutes as an 
important source. The number of schemes such as, construction of houses, schools, 
educating masses, helping people by liberal collection of donations from public in 
emergencies or in disasters etc, are some of the key initiatives initiated by media could be 
considered as their contribution in the augmentation of human rights in the country, apart 
from the expression and dissemination of news and views to public at large. A free and 
responsible media could be a watchdog not only to prevent violations of human rights but 
could effectively disseminate the ideals of human rights for their promotion.
Legal professionals play a vital role in the promotion and protection of Human 
rights. Though it is argued that the promotion and protection of human rights is every 
ones field, legal profession and the professionals of law play a vital role in the 
development of principles and application due to their close connection with law. 
b) Role of Lawyers-Legal Aid :

Role of Advocacy Groups
86
Legal professionals include lawyers, judges, legal officers, 
legal advisors, professors of law and anybody who practices 
law and works for the promotion of human rights (otherwise 
referred to as free lawns lawyers). Lawyers through their 
interpretative skills temper the principles of law to evolve 
new principles and at the forefront in advocating the 
promotion of human rights through their extensive legal 
debates, writings and through participation in condemning 
the repressive movements, which violate human rights. In 
the contemporary era, across the World, on a number of 
occasions lawyers and other legal professionals played a crucial role in the 
development of laws relating to prohibition of torture, augmentation of women's 
rights, prohibitive laws on trafficking, etc. Apart from lawyers, other legal 
professionals such as judges, legal advocators and professors of law also play a vital 
role in tampering the principles of law and stand to oppose the  policies of state which 
threaten the enjoyment of human rights, especially during emergencies, war periods 
and in authoritarian regimes. 
In the context of India, a number of legal professionals, which include lawyers, 
played a significant role in the development of human rights. A number of lawyers 
through public interest litigation brought in a number of suits, which became 
responsible for expansion of the concept of life and liberty under Article 21 of the 
constitution of India. The Judiciary has added a number of rights, which were not 
explicitly defined in the constitution, as a part of Life and 
liberty. The litigation by lawyers and professors in India led 
for the development of rights of women, equal pay for equal 
work, environmental protection laws, child welfare, 
protection of rights of HIV/AIDS patients, prevention of 
domestic violence, torture in prisons, speedy justice etc. 
Apart from practicing law, often a number of lawyers 
and judges joined together to educate masses and help people 
in need of protection of human rights through various organisations and forums such 
as lawyers collective, lawyers club etc. to educate and to fight for the promotion of 
rights of citizens. 

Role of Advocacy Groups
87
Legal Aid is another important platform to realise and promote human rights. 
Though there are attempts in France in 1851 to introduce legal aid, it was USA, which 
laid the seeds for free legal aid with the establishment of First Legal Aid Society in 
New York in 1876. In 1949, England introduced the Legal Aid and Advice Act.  
Reginal Herber Smit advocated the concept of free legal assistance for the poor in 
1919 in his book, Justice and the Poor. He advocated that it is an obligation of legal 
professionals to defend the cases of every one including the poor. Legal Aid means, 
rendering justice to poor people without charging any fees to address their grievances. 
In India since 1952 attempts were started to address in the issue of legal aid 
through conferences, seminars, conferences of Law Ministers and Law Commission 
of India. In 1960, certain guidelines were framed to offer legal aid and were initiated in 
a number of states through law boards. In 1980, the Government of India established a 
committee under the chairmanship of former Justice P.N. Bhagwati on the name of 
committee for Implementing Legal Aid Schemes.  This committee introduced another 
significant indigenous concept of Lok Adalat (People's Court) which disposes the 
cases through conciliatory means in the presence of judicial officers. In 1987, the 
Government of India enacted the Legal Services Authorities Act with an aim 
uniformly to implement the justice dispensation system as under sec. 39 (A) which 
impose an obligation on the state that the operation of the legal system promotes 
justice on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall in particular, provide free legal aid, by 
suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for 
securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disability. 
The same was guaranteed under Articles 14 and 22(1) of the fundamental rights that 
equality before law and a legal system need to promote justice to all and equal 
opportunity be provided. 
The Bar Council of India considering the significant role of the legal aid many 
university departments of law and law colleges in the country established legal aid 
cells to offer dispute redress mechanism in a free and fair manner to poor. To render 
justice through this system, legal professionals play a vital role in promoting human 
rights of citizens.  
Education plays a vital role in the promotion and dissemination of human 
rights. Education being the potential tool to metamorphose any society, individual or 
c)  Educational Institutions:

Role of Advocacy Groups
88
institution, the framers of Universal Declaration of Human Rights through Article 
26.2 entrusted the duty to educators to bring in social order to foster human personality 
in understanding, strengthening and promotion of human rights. The World 
Conference on Human Rights in its Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 
(1993) emphasized the significant role played by education and educational 
institutions. Accordingly, it requested nation-states to take necessary steps to inculcate 
the philosophy of human rights through all means of education and all types of 
educational institutions to eradicate illiteracy, to equip people to counter the maladies 
of human rights violations. Accordingly, the United Nations declared the period 1995 
to 2004 as Human Rights Education. The UN emphasizing the role of education and 
educational institutions in 2011 declared that human rights education is a lifelong 
process it needs to be imparted continuously. 
The nation-states immediately after the establishment of the UN, in 1945 
established United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organisation was 
established (UNECSO) with a firm belief that education and educational institutions 
play a vital role to achieve peace by guiding nation-states through the intellectual and 
moral solidarity of humanity. Since its establishment to strive to achieve the object, 
UNESCO drew a number of plans to inculcate the significance of education, 
especially human rights education to oversee every child in the world, to receive 
qualitative education as a fundamental human right for the all round human and 
sustainable development. It offers a number of programmes in every field of 
education; adopt policies that are suitable for the promotion of education in general 
and children education in particular.
Apart from UNESCO, the Officer of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR) established sixty years ago as a small division to promote human 
rights. However, with the growth and significance attached to human rights by UN in 
1993, the General Assembly expanded the centre for human Rights as OHCHR. The 
OHCHR has developed a number of education series to impart human rights from 
primary level to research perspectives by educational institutions. It works with a 
number of organisations of UN and with member states to develop plans and over see 
impartation of human rights education.
Educational institutions need not to be looked as training centers to impart 
certain kind of skills and knowledge to students, but need to be considered as 
institutions, which impart the process of socialization. This is a most important and 

Role of Advocacy Groups
89
powerful too, as they train pupil in various facets 
such as life skills, socialization, cultural, moral, 
ethical values, which equip them with 
sustainable developmental attitudes apart from 
knowledge-based hubs. The UN considering the 
role that educational institutions play in the 
enjoyment and realisation of human rights 
adopted a number of declarations requesting the 
nation-states to impart Human Rights on a 
compulsory basis from primarily level to 
university level. Accordingly, UN and its organs adopted a number of strategies to 
impart human rights education at different levels. 
According to various instruments at the primary level, the philosophy of 
human rights needs to be taught in a simple and understandable perspective with 
simple cartoons and illustrations. At the secondary level, students need to be imparted 
about the UN and the initiatives in developing human rights. At the collegiate level, 
the course structure needs to be focused towards appreciation of the critical 
components of human rights. At this stage, the students need to be trained with 
practical dimensions to search solutions to real problems of society. At the university 
level, the students need be oriented to appreciate the technical mechanisms of 
international and national spheres and be asked to prepare modules interlinking 
various subjects incorporating the value systems advocated by UN in its various 
documents. At the research level, students are guided to examine issues that are 
internationally and nationally important to identify remedial mechanism with an 
orientation of sustainable development. The entire curricula need to orient the duty 
concept and interlink with rights and duties.
Indian philosophy from ancient to modern times advocates common brother-
hood without any kind of discrimination and develop a duty conscious citizens. 
However, the invasion of foreign rule in middle and modern periods changed its 
philosophical base and introduced the rights centrist education on the name of 
modernization. Nevertheless, the cherished ideals of freedom movement lead the 
constitutional framers to reintroduce its ancient ideals of value oriented duty bound 
society through constitution.
In tune with the ideology of the constitution, the government has taken a 

Role of Advocacy Groups
90
number of steps to introduce value based human rights education. However, 
unfortunately majority of the instruments remain as instruments and efforts for the 
promotion of human rights education is still in its infancy in the country. The UGC 
taking into consideration of the Plan of Action on Education for Human Rights and 
Democracy adopted by the World Congress on Human 
Rights in 1993, and in response to the clarion call of 
Ministry of Human Resources Development developed a 
number of guidelines to promote HRE at the University 
level. Apart from the above, the Human Rights Act 1993, 
clearly emphasies the significance of importance of 
Human Rights Education and the role to be played by 
NHRC, State Human Rights Commissions and educational 
institutions.Off late a number of institutes realising the significance and taking efforts 
for introduction of teaching Human Rights education. The Institute of Human Rights 
Education, Madurai took a number of efforts in the promotion of human rights literacy 
and adopted a number of schools since 1997. With the same aim University of pune, 
since 2010 offering Human Rights Education on a mass scale.
The impartation of human rights education certainly empower people to 
evolve solutions to a number of issue that are plaguing the societies across the world 
and could create a congenial atmosphere where in every one can lead their life and 
liberty without any distortion,  miseries, and could establish peace and security, the 
prime objective of international law of human rights. 
There exists an inseparable link between commerce and society. Companies 
being part of society as legal persons, they 
need to discharge their societal obligations, 
to protect the rights and obligations of 
various stakeholders, such as shareholders, 
employees, obligations and be legalistic in 
their transactions to be good corporate 
citizens. The evolution of globalization, 
developments in science and technology, 
and a number of political, socio, economic, 
cultural, and legal aspects led the corporate houses to expand their business beyond 
d)  Role of Corporate Sector 

Role of Advocacy Groups
91
borders. In their competitive quest for supremacy and to 
expansion of trade and business houses, there is every 
possibility that they may relegate to a secondary position 
of their legal obligations towards society and a number 
of stakeholders, especially, in protecting the rights of its 
employees. 
To regulate the behaviour of corporate houses, a 
number of rules and regulations are in existence in both 
national and international law. However, end of cold war 
and the fourth phase of globalization account not only for the rise of dominance of 
corporate house over political, social, economic, for legal and cultural perspectives in 
the world, but also account for increased debate of human rights in every field which 
includes business. Further, the dominance of Multi National Corporations in 
expanding the business and other issues of governance in the developing world, led the 
UN to focus its attention on the increasing role of the relationship between human 
rights and business. In the year 1999, the Secretary General of the UN in his annual 
meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos launched a Global Compact which 
called upon business to "support and respect the protection of internationally 
proclaimed human rights within their sphere of influence and make sure they are not 
complicit in human rights abuses.” It articulated broadly ten principles basing on 
international legal standards agreed universally which needs to be respected and 
implemented by business houses. 
The principles are:
1. Businesses should support and respect the protection of international 
human rights within their sphere of influence; 
2. Make sure their own corporations are not complicit in human rights 
abuses.
3. Businesses should uphold the freedom of association and the effective 
recognition of the  right to collective bargaining of labour ;
4. The elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labour
5. The effective abolition of child labor;
6. The elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and 
occupation.

Role of Advocacy Groups
92
7. Businesses should support a precautionary approach to environmental 
challenges;
8. Undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility; 
and
9. Encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally friendly 
technologies.
10. Businesses should work against corruption in all its forms, including 
extortion and bribery. 
Basing on these principles, to extend support and help the corporate houses to 
adopt the mandate of the international community for the promotion and protection of 
human rights launched a special website as business.un.org. Through this web access, 
business houses could interact with the concerned UN organs and to know their rights 
and responsibilities in the promotion of human rights. Basing on the reports of abuse 
by corporate houses of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in 
2005 the UN appointed John Ruggie, a Professor of Harvard University as a special 
representative of the Secretary General to submit a report. The final report of Prof. 
Ruggie in 2008, found that apart from various sectors, the extractive sectors, oil, gas, 
and mining are account for two-thirds of abuses of human rights in the world. The UN 
is taking a number of steps to oversee the promotion of human rights through its global 
compact governance. It also appealed to states to oversee the implementation of 
human rights principles by business establishments in their respective territorial 
jurisdictions, and to amend the national laws of business incorporating the principles 
of human rights to be followed by corporate houses as a part of their social 
responsibility. 
India has a long tradition of involvement of business in social welfare and 
other developmental promotional aspects of the governance in the country. In 2011, 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs of the Government of India 
adopted a set of principles on Social, Economical and 
Environmental (updating the original principles issued in 
2009) responsibilities to adopt voluntarily by business.
1.
Businesses should conduct and govern 
themselves with Ethics, Transparency, and 
accountability.
 
Ministry of
Corporate Affairs

Role of Advocacy Groups
93
2.
Businesses should provide goods and services that are safe and contribute 
to sustainability throughout their life cycle.
3.
Businesses should promote the well being of all employees.
4.
Businesses should respect the interests of, and be responsive towards all 
stakeholders, especially those who are disadvantaged, vulnerable and 
marginalized.
5.
Businesses should respect and promote human rights.
6.
Business should respect, protect, and make efforts to restore the 
environment.
7.
Businesses, when engaged in influencing public and regulatory policy, 
should do so in a responsible manner.
8.
Businesses should support inclusive growth and equitable development.
9.
Businesses should engage with and provide value to their customers and 
consumers in a responsible manner.
It requests every kind of business need to integrate these principles voluntarily. 
The guidelines also offer strategies for Responsible business and approach the ways 
and means to integrate the principles. The Government also established Indian 
Institute of Corporate Affairs in Delhi to specially focus on the needs of business and 
to aid and assist both the government and business. Apart from the above, it is taking 
steps to integrate the principles by amending or enacting legislations in the area of 
corporate law and governance. 
Business is an integral part of society need to observe all the human rights 
without any deviation.  It is the duty of corporate houses, business schools to impart 
the principles of human rights for the healthy promotion of business to prevent any 
kind of abuse of rights in the corporate sector and in society.   
In all round development of a state and people, capacity development plays a 
vital role. Capacity development implies strategic planning with a focused attention of 
state in every sector especially, education and health sectors, which play a vital role for 
the development of a state and in the promotion of human rights. In the case of 
individuals, capacity building imparts the process of development and knowledge 
about the rights and obligations. Capacity building, in other words, empowers people 
e) NGOs : '

Role of Advocacy Groups
94
to secure the ways and means of guaranteed rights, 
impose responsibility on state to enhance its 
capacity to meet the requirements of people. Many 
a times, for varied reasons, states fail to live up to 
the expectations of people, which ultimately create 
a vacuum. As an offshoot to fill the gap, to achieve 
the capacity-building concept, Non Governmental 
Organisations came into existence. They mainly 
prevail upon governments to fill the gap and 
demand that for strategic priorities with a focus to 
enable the disadvantaged sections of society to 
reach and able to enjoy their guaranteed rights. NGOs’ in a nutshell, act as critics, 
capacity builders, innovators, advocators and as policy partners in general and in 
particular in promotion and realisation of human rights. 
Non Governmental Organisations play a vital role in the local, regional, 
national and international promotion, protection and realisation of human rights. They 
have a long tradition to take part in the promotional aspects of human rights through 
advocacy, mobilization, capacity building, and work for a group or in general. In 1950, 
the Economical and Social Council through resolution 288 (X) extended consultative 
status to NGO is in tune with the objectives of Article 71 of the United Nations Charter. 
According to ECOSOC as defined in 1996, NGO means, “any such organisation that 
is not established by a governmental entity or intergovernmental agreement to work in 
conformity with the spirit, purpose and principles of the UN Charter, with a recognised 
standing in the field, with democratic organisational structure, and have authority to 
speak for their members, with an appropriate accountability mechanism.” Apart from 
the above criteria, they should be non-profit making, a political in nature and 
registered according to the law of the country where they are primarily established. 
NGO's which work for the promotion of human rights may be referred to as 
Human Rights NGOs. This type of organisations mainly works for human 
development, humanitarian aspects and aspects of environment. They may work 
either directly or indirectly. Some of the organisations are specialized in a particular 
area and they work to enrich that area and demand for the implementation of existing 
international treaties or bring in pressure on the nation-states and international 
organisations to draft new regulations on any specific area. Many a times they choose 

Role of Advocacy Groups
95
to bring pressure through international forums on the governments for the 
implementation of international human rights legal regulations at domestic level. 
In the national level, they are always in the forefront to bring in desired reforms 
to prevent abuses in any area. It was the continuous fight by the NGOs’, a number of 
new legislations are adopted and existing ones have been amended in India. 
Environmental Protection Act, legislations on women's rights, gay and lesbian rights, 
recognition of live in relationships, right to food, and a number of other aspects came 
into existence.
The increasing role of NGOs’ is a welcome feature. However, they need to 
adopt transparent methods in their strategies and handling governments without 
resorting to corruption and other abusive practices. Any deviations in their motto not 
only cripple the motives, but also lose the confidence of people and state. 
The subtle discussion on the role of advocacy groups amply brings in the 
important role played by them in the promotion of human rights.  In a number of 
circumstances, they work not only as advocacy groups but also cautious agents to 
suggest remedial mechanism to state and international organizations for the 
betterment of their future policy perspective in augmenting human rights at every 
level.
4.  Sum up:

Role of Advocacy Groups
96
MODEL QUESTIONS 
1. James Augustus Hickey, an English man started the Bengal Gazettee on 
January 29, 1780 and also popularly known as “…………...”
2. Though there are attempts in France in 1851 to introduce legal aid, it was 
……… which laid the seeds for free legal aid with the establishment of 
First Legal Aid Society in 1876.
3.  UNECSO means
4. In 1949, ………….introduced the Legal Aid and Advice Act.
5. In 1980, the Government of India established a Committee under the 
chairmanship of former ……………. on the name of Committee for 
Implementing Legal Aid Schemes.
A.
Mumbai news
(B)
B.
Calcutta Advertiser
C.
Madras Images
D.
None of the above
A.
India
B.
United Kingdom
(C)
C.
United States of America
D.
Canada
A.
United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organisation
B.
United Nations Environmental, Cultural and 
Scientific Organisation 
(A)
C.
United Nations Educational, Cultural and Social Organisation 
D.
United Nations Economical, Cultural and Scientific Organisation 
A.
India
B.
Australia
(C)
C.
England
D.
None of the above
A.
Justice Krishna Iyer
B.
Justice Gajendragadkar
(C)
C.
Justice P.N. Bhagwati
D.
None of the above

Conclusion
Conclusion:
The first book introduced the conceptual perspective and the evolution of 
international law of human rights. The Second book deals with the rights of socially, 
economically, and culturally disadvantaged groups of people and the efforts 
undertaken by international and national legal systems to promote ways and means by 
extending concessions to achieve their rights to attain the status of equality.
The brief overview in this third and final book in the series on Human Rights 
and Duties in India: Law, Policy, Society and Enforcement Mechanism presents that 
whatever the principles and theories advocated at the international plane, they need to 
be nurtured and implemented at the national level. The implementation process at the 
national level ensures that there exists an enduring relationship between international 
law and municipal law. States and their legal policies and enforcement mechanisms 
prove to be laboratories to result in further augmentation of legal principles for the 
community of nations and people of the world.
The examination of relevant constitutional provisions, enforcement 
mechanisms and the role played by human rights defenders certainly opens the 
horizons of every one to decide the type of role that one has to play in the promotion, 
protection and realisation of human rights. Being citizens of a value based, culturally 
diversified and advanced country in the World, it is a primary duty of every one of us to 
extend their helping hand in any manner that is possible to augment the philosophy of 
human rights.
As rightly advocated by the Preamble of the constitution, to achieve justice, 
liberty, equality and fraternity in their true spirit as oriented, every one of us need to 
take a pledge to discharge the duties as advocated by human rights and the 
constitution. The discharge of duties with all sincerity in true spirit will certainly 
augment the rights as guaranteed by law. Any deviation in the philosophy would lead 
to create chaos in the augmentation of the fundamental freedoms of individuals. 
97

References
References: 
?
A.G. Noorani, Constitutional Questions & Citizens' Rights, (Oxford University Press, 
New Delhi ,2006).
?
Alice Donald and Elizabeth Mottershaw, Report On  Poverty, Inequality And Human 
Rights, September 2009, United Kingdom
?
Bethan Cobley, Ed.  IDSN-2011  Report : International Consultation On Caste-Based 
Discrimination, 29 November - 1 December,  Kathmandu · Nepal, International Dalit 
Solidarity Network, Denmark.
?
Comprehensive Review on the Status of Implementation of Resolution 1540 (2004)
?
Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights, Dec. 4-5, 2007,Geneva
?
Corruption and Human Rights: Making the Connection, International Council on 
Human Rights Policy,2009
?
D. J. De, Interpretation & Enforcement Of Fundamental Rights, (Eastern Law House 
Pvt. Ltd., Calcutta 2000)
?
Donald Heisel, Population and Development : Challenges and Opportunities- 
Population and Human Rights, Encyclopedia of Life Support System (EOLSS), New 
York, United States of America
?
G.N. Ray, The Role of Media in Protection of Human Rights, Human Rights Council, 
January 11, 2007, Visakhapatnam
?
Granville Austin, Working A Democratic Constitution : The Indian Experience, (Oxford 
University Press, New Delhi, 2000)
?
Human Rights and Poverty Reduction :A Conceptual Framework , OHCHR United 
Nations, New York and Geneva, 2004
?
Ilas Bantekas & Lutz Oette, International Human Rights : Law  and Practice, 
(Cambridge 2013.)
?
Inger Ulleberg, The Role and Impact of NGO's in Capacity Development :From 
Replacing the State to Reinvigorating Education,2009/10, 
?
Jayanth K. Krishnan And C. Raj Kumar, Delay In Process, Denial Of Justice: The 
Jurisprudence And Empirics Of Speedy Trials In Comparative Perspective, Georgetown 
Journal Of International Law, Vol, 42, 2011, 747-784
?
Lee Macqueen Paul1 Addressing caste discrimination In Humanitarian Response,  
National Dalit Watch-National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights (NCDHR), November 
2011,New Delhi
?
Mandeep Tiwana , Ed. Sara Hossain, Chennai Judicial Exchange on Access to Justice: A 
Report, November 5- 7, 2004, the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) New 
Delhi, 
?
Mandeep Tiwana, Ed. Maja Daruwala, Human Rights And Policing: Landmark Supreme 
Court Directives & National Human Rights Commission Guidelines, April 2005, CHRI, 
New Delhi
?
Marc Titus D. Cebreros, Empowering The Poor Through Human Rights Based Access To 
International Institute For 
Educational Planning, Paris, France
98

References
Justice, Asian Regional Consortium for Human Rights-Based Access to Justice, 
University of the Philippines Law Center.
?
National Human Rights Institutions :History, Principles, Roles And Responsibilities, 
Series No. 4 (Rev. 1), 2010, United Nations Publication, New York and Geneva
?
National Voluntary Guidelines on Social, Environmental & Economic Responsibilities of 
Business of Business, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India, New Delhi, 
2011
?
Preventing Corruption, Anti-Corruption Policies in Asia and The Pacific
?
Reed Boland, Population Policies, Human Rights, And Legal Change, The American 
University Law Review Vol. 44, 1995, 1257-1278
?
Richard J. Wilson, Jennifer Rasmusen,Reseached By, Scott Codey Promoting Justice : A 
Practical Guide to Strategic Human Rights Lawyering, International Human Rights Law 
Group, 2001,Washington, USA, 
?
Slamming the Courthouse Doors: Denial of Access to Justice And Remedy in America, 
December,2010, American Civil Liberties Union, New York
?
State of human rights in india, 2001, Indian Institute of Human Rights 
rd
?
Sujata V. Manohar, T.K.Tope's “Constitutional Law Of India”, 3  Ed. (Eastern Book 
Company, Lucknow,2010,)
?
Surinder Khanna, Dalit Women And Human Rights., Swastik Publications, Delhi, 2011.
?
T.S. Devadoss, “SARVODAYA And The Problem Of Political Sovereignty”, 
st   
1 Ed., 1974, University of Madras 
?
T.S.N. Sastry, “India And Human Rights Reflections”, (Concept Publishing Company, 
New Delhi 2005
?
Thomas E. Carbonneau*The French Legal Studies Curriculum: Its History and 
Relevance as a Model for Reform, McGILL Law Journal,  Vol. 25, 1980, 445-477
?
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (ILLUSTRATED), by United 
Nations, United Nations Office in Geneva, (also available in French), ISBN 13: 
9789211014921, Sales Number: GV.08.0.2, October 2008.
?
Victoria Chioma Nwankwo, The Role of The Media in Promoting Human 
Rights: An Analysis of the BBC documentary, 'Chocolate: the bitter truth',  2011, 
London.
?
Christopher Koliba, Democracy and Education : Schools and Communities Initiative : 
Conceptual Framework and Preliminary Findings, May 8, 2000, available at 
?
Child protection and child rights available at 
Websites Referred: 
http://www.uvm.edu/~dewey/articles/Democonc.html
http://www.ohchr.org/en/Issues/Development/GoodGovernance/Pages/GoodGovernan
ceIndex.aspx
http://www.childlineindia.org.in/child-in-
india.htm
?
G o o d  G o v e r n a n c e  a n d  H u m a n  R i g h t s ,  a v a i l a b l e  a t  
99

References
?
Boca Raton, Sociology: The Basic Principles of Sociology for Introductory Courses., 
Quick Study. (2000) available at  
?
The Constitution (Sixty-Fifth Amendment) Act 1990 available at 
?
Khadija Turay : Human Rights and Population Politics in India during the Emergency 
and at the Present Moment : A Population Policy Transition, available at 
?
Meredith McBride : History of Population Control in India available at 
?
Business and Human Rights: A Progress Report available at
?
Introduction To Print Media available at 
 
?
available 
?
Justice T. Mathivanan, Judge ,Madras High Court :  Legal Aid Issues , Challenges And 
Solutions -An Empirical Study available at 
?
Introduction And History of NALSA available at 
 
?
International Human Rights Advocacy Groups available at 
?
Good Governanace available at 
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
http://sociology.about.com/od/ 
Disciplines/a/Sociology-Of-Social-Inequality.htm
http://indiacode.nic.in/coiweb/amend/amend65.htm
http://www.irmgard-coninxstiftung.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf/ 
Population_Politics/PopPolitics/Turay.pdf
http://humanrightsinasia.wordpress.coam/2012/07/31/history-of-population-control-
in-india/
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/BusinessHRen.pdf
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/ 
Publications/BusinessHRen.pdf
http://www.hcmadras.tn.nic.in/legalaid-
issues.pdf
http://nalsa.gov.in/
http://www.guidetoaction.org/intlgrps.html
http://smilefoundationindia.org/ governance.htm 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/TBPetitions/Pages/HRTBPetitions.aspx#
interstate
http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/maha-govt-sets-up-
committee-to-frame-child-welfare-policy-113051601012_1.html
http://ncsc.nic.in/files/ncsc/new3/200.pdf
://www.persecution.in/content/missionary-herman-kannada-litterateur-launched-
first-kannada-newspaper-and-journalism
http://www.buzzle.com/articles/what-is-distributive-justice.html
http://www.vegaenviron.org/
http://sacredheartattheun.org/content/disarmament
http://www.oijj.org/sites/default/files/images/eventos/agenda_195573.jpg
http://www.humanrightslogo.net/sites/default/files/styles/galleryfull/public/images/
sumssions/11913%2520-%2520hr6.png?itok=3F9Mdt0k
 
Missionary Herman Kannada litterateur launched first Kannada Newspaper and 
Journalism 
at http://www.persecution.in/content/ missionary-herman-
kannada-litterateur-launched-first-kannada-newspaper-and-journalism
Human Rights Bodies - Complaints Procedures available at 
http
100

References
101
?
http://www.sarvodayanano.org/vinobha-bhave.jpg
?
http://lucideus.com/images/clients/c20.png
?
http://www.ohchr.org/SiteCollectionImages/Design/EN/header_EN.jpg
?
http://www.assignmentpoint.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Legal-Aid.jpg
?
http://www.mshrc.gov.in/Images/Logo.jpg
?
http://www.antya.com/upload/3/NCST.JPG
?
http://grist.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/earth-people-population_463x463.jpg
?
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/4/41/Flag_of_India.svg
?
http://www.american.com/archive/2011/november/right-to-work-
unionism/FeaturedImage
?
http://images.mid-day.com/2013/jul/border.jpg
?
http://www.boldsky.com/img/2011/09/05-teach-kids-050911.jpg
?
http://www.malaysianur.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Brotherhood.gif
?
http://www.thecapitalconferencecenter.com/ccc/images/adr_logo.jpg
?
http://www.cie-waseda.jp/en/news/international/2658/
?
http://www.ejpress.org/ImageGallery/61baa9d5-2e2e-42a4-a00d-552386f858ec.jpg
?
http://education.oneindia.in/img/2013/09/02-hrdministry.jpg
?
http://2.imimg.com/data2/AQ/JA/MY-2230294/mpj043313900001-250x250.jpg
?
http://reflectivepr.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/ngo.jpg
?
http://www.keanlaw.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Scales-of-Justice.jpg
?
http://www.divineinn.com/images/RedFort.jpg
?
http://www.borgenmagazine.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/2013-
WorldEnvironment-Day-Think-Eat-Save.png
?
http://www.viewdigital.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/legal-aid-logo.jpg
?
http://www.digitalrtimission.com/Judiciary,_Executive_and_Legislative_Affairs.html
?
http://www.socialwelfaredepartment.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/Domestic-
Violence-Act-2005.jpg
?
http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-5ee5MxN8KhQ/T0d29dZBZ0I/AAAAAAAABpA/1b-
GxZFYVac/s320/media+mikes.jpg
?
http://www.google.co.in/imgres?um=1&hl=en&sout=0&biw=1366&bih=667&tbm=isc
h&tbnid=GfVXmsz5lYwWGM:&imgrefurl=http://www.firstpost.com/tag/uniform-
civil-
code&docid=mqDI0UjWoUK65M&imgurl=http://cache.daylife.com/imageserve/03F3d
eyej3fx9/600x609.jpg&w=600&h=609&ei=fCAsUtvOD4PPkwXpjIHQBg&zoom=1&
ved=1t:3588,r:17,s:0,i:129
?

References
102
?
http://www.ohmeghalaya.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/nhrc.jpg
?
http://www.indianetzone.com/photos_gallery/32/NationalHuman_22354.jpg
?
http://ncw.nic.in/Images/logo-ncw.gif
?
http://images.jagran.com/ncpcr-b-29-9-2012.jpg
?
http://muslimmirror.com/eng/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/june9-2005.jpg
?
http://ncsc.nic.in/upload/logo/logo.png
?
http://ncst.nic.in/index.asp?langid=1
?
http://www.opportunitiesforafricans.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/united-nations-
logo.jpg
?
http://people.howstuffworks.com/population-six-billion.htm
?
http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-
bjCOCB3DHNU/UT2qSWMC0mI/AAAAAAAAAVc/BNoVKWq0BVo/s1600/Caste-
Discrimination.jpg
?
http://www.unescap.org/HUSET/gg/image2.gif
?
http://loreal-dam-front-resources-corp-en-cdn.brainsonic.com/ressources/afile/1533-
7e431-picture_photo-the-global-compact-we-support-logo.html
?
http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/gif/par1.jpg
?
http://www.nursinguniforms.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/dis.jpg
?
http://scm-l3.technorati.com/12/11/28/73551/male-female-
equality.jpg?t=20121128160858
?
http://jaymans.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/equality_fence.png?w=595&h=488
?
http://adam1cor.files.wordpress.com/2010/06/20070828bizreligion_dm_500.jpg
?
http://inspirationaldaily.files.wordpress.com/2012/01/mahatma-gandhi-inspirational-
daily.jpg
?
http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-Q-1351-
0hMY/URnujVRq0OI/AAAAAAAAAVI/gJuK4pyaLo8/s1600/fundamental-
rights+(1).jpg
?
http://www.jharkhand.gov.in/ceo/2005/preamble.gif
?
http://www.co.ozaukee.wi.us/sheriff/JailArrest.jpg
?
http://leadbihar.wordpress.com/tag/total-revolution/
?
http://girlsjustwannahaveguns.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/hammer.jpg
?
http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-
eEZILFw4L44/TyVIEJgN9CI/AAAAAAAAASw/D9XVnH9a5OY/s1600/scmid.gif
?
http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/sciphoto/images/image008.jpg
?
http://www.mapsofindia.com/india-images/delhi/landmarks/rashtrapati-bhawan.jpg

References
103
?
http://reasonsoflife.files.wordpress.com/2008/08/indian-flag-12.gif
?
http://qph.is.quoracdn.net/main-thumb-t-285902-50-
VvJujkSA2J168g7mmnuzqrvVCnMY8X6z.jpeg
?
http://www.lsbauctions.com/771/the-low-commission-fallacy-the-games-other-auction-
houses-play/
?
http://getfile3.posterous.com/getfile/files.posterous.com/temp-2012-10-
01/yFjpyuFblvIdsElCqisqrBvngmDCssfIJegdpshEdFlJuAjCwldhhIoEyjnd/divinejustic
e.jpg.scaled1000.jpg
?
http://www.canstockphoto.com/images-photos/tripura.html
?
http://www.city.fukuyama.hiroshima.jp/jinkenheiwashiryoukan/aisatu/mark.gif
?
http://www.123rf.com/photo_5744705_hand-discriminating-green-goldfish-isolated-on-
white.html
?
http://thecalmspace.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/Freedom-
iStock_000007259315Small.jpg
?
http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-
clzI5ER2Ed4/UfE9aj5GUxI/AAAAAAAAAL8/VbuzwVDgFNA/s1600/Political+Scie
nce.jpeg
?
http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-
SD2fTTdSEVE/TpvKfpvJYAI/AAAAAAAAARY/UK4mUu1BP5o/s1600/thght948.gif
?
http://www.ohchr.org/en/Issues/Development/GoodGovernance/Pages/GoodGovernance
Index.aspx
?
http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/maha-govt-sets-up-
committee-to-frame-child-welfare-policy-113051601012_1.html
q
q

Dr. T.S.N. Sastry is a senior teacher spanning over more- than two and half decades 
of teaching, and research experience, especially in the-fields of International Law 
and Human Rights. He authored three books on International Law of State 
Succession, Introduction to Human Rights and Duties, Human Rights of Vulnerable 
& Disadvantaged Groups, edited three books on Human Rights and Constitution. 
He published a number of Research papers in journals of repute on International 
Law, Human Rights and Constitution of India. He was an academic fellow of the 
Erasmus Mundus External Window Lot 13. Dr. Sastry Delivered lectures on various 
areas of international law, human rights in a number of Indian and Foreign 
Universities. He was the fellow under the cultural exchange programme of the 
Government of France twice in 2006 and 2013. He received Vijaya Shree Award 
from the Indian International Friendship Society, New Delhi in 2005 for his efforts 
for the propagation of Human Rights Education. 
Dr. Sastry was responsible in establishing the UGC Centre for Human Rights and 
Duties Education in 1997 in the Pondicherry (Central) University. As a founder 
coordinator of the centre, he conducted a number of programmes, seminars, and 
conferences for the propagation of human rights, apart from the academic 
programmes leading to research and teaching in human rights. He served as Dean, 
Director, and Controller of Examinations at Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law 
University, Chennai. He was the Former Head of Department of Law, University of 
Pune, member of a number of academic bodies including the Management Council 
of University of Pune.  He served in as a member various committees of UGC and 
Governmental organizations. He is the Visiting Professor of the Chanakya National 
Law University, Patna. Dr. Sastry Conducted a number of seminars and workshops.
About the Author


